<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 7.1, https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8">
<title>1.3 (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)</title>

<meta name="description" content="1.3 (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)">
<meta name="keywords" content="1.3 (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)">
<meta name="resource-type" content="document">
<meta name="distribution" content="global">
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any">
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,initial-scale=1">

<link href="index.xhtml" rel="start" title="Top">
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml" rel="index" title="Term Index">
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents">
<link href="Chapter-1.xhtml" rel="up" title="Chapter 1">
<link href="Chapter-2.xhtml" rel="next" title="Chapter 2">
<link href="1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2" rel="prev" title="1.2">
<style type="text/css">
<!--
a.copiable-link {visibility: hidden; text-decoration: none; line-height: 0em}
div.example {margin-left: 3.2em}
span.r {font-family: initial; font-weight: normal; font-style: normal}
span:hover a.copiable-link {visibility: visible}
ul.mark-bullet {list-style-type: disc}
-->
</style>

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body lang="en">
<div class="section-level-extent" id="g_t1_002e3">
<div class="nav-panel">
<p>
Next: <a href="Chapter-2.xhtml" accesskey="n" rel="next">Building Abstractions with Data</a>, Previous: <a href="1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Procedures and the Processes They Generate</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml" accesskey="u" rel="up">Building Abstractions with Procedures</a> &nbsp; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml" title="Index" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</div>
<h3 class="section" id="Formulating-Abstractions-with-Higher_002dOrder-Procedures"><span>1.3 Formulating Abstractions with Higher-Order Procedures<a class="copiable-link" href="#Formulating-Abstractions-with-Higher_002dOrder-Procedures"> &para;</a></span></h3>

<p>We have seen that procedures are, in effect, abstractions that describe
compound operations on numbers independent of the particular numbers.  For
example, when we
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn cube(x: i64) -&gt; i64 {
    x * x * x
}
</pre></div>

<p>we are not talking about the cube of a particular number, but rather about a
method for obtaining the cube of any number.  Of course we could get along
without ever defining this procedure, by always writing expressions such as
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">3 * 3 * 3
x * x * x
y * y * y
</pre></div>

<p>and never mentioning <code class="code">cube</code> explicitly.  This would place us at a serious
disadvantage, forcing us to work always at the level of the particular
operations that happen to be primitives in the language (multiplication, in
this case) rather than in terms of higher-level operations.  Our programs would
be able to compute cubes, but our language would lack the ability to express
the concept of cubing.  One of the things we should demand from a powerful
programming language is the ability to build abstractions by assigning names to
common patterns and then to work in terms of the abstractions directly.
Procedures provide this ability.  This is why all but the most primitive
programming languages include mechanisms for defining procedures.
</p>
<p>Yet even in numerical processing we will be severely limited in our ability to
create abstractions if we are restricted to procedures whose parameters must be
numbers.  Often the same programming pattern will be used with a number of
different procedures.  To express such patterns as concepts, we will need to
construct procedures that can accept procedures as arguments or return
procedures as values.  Procedures that manipulate procedures are called
<a class="index-entry-id" id="index-higher_002dorder-procedures"></a>
<em class="dfn">higher-order procedures</em>.  This section shows how higher-order
procedures can serve as powerful abstraction mechanisms, vastly increasing the
expressive power of our language.
</p>

<hr>
<div class="subsection-level-extent" id="g_t1_002e3_002e1">
<h4 class="subsection" id="Procedures-as-Arguments"><span>1.3.1 Procedures as Arguments<a class="copiable-link" href="#Procedures-as-Arguments"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>Consider the following three procedures.  The first computes the sum of the
integers from <code class="code">a</code> through <code class="code">b</code>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sum_integers(a: i64, b: i64) -&gt; i64 {
    if a &gt; b {
        0
    } else {
        a + sum_integers(a + 1, b)
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>The second computes the sum of the cubes of the integers in the given range:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sum_cubes(a: i64, b: i64) -&gt; i64 {
    if a &gt; b {
        0
    } else {
        cube(a) + sum_cubes(a + 1, b)
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>The third computes the sum of a sequence of terms in the series

\[ % :17:
  
\frac{1}{1\cdot 3} +  \frac{1}{5\cdot 7} + \frac{1}{9\cdot 11} + {\dots,}
\]

which converges to <em class="math">{\pi / 8}</em> (very slowly):<a class="footnote" id="DOCF44" href="#FOOT44"><sup>44</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn pi_sum(a: i64, b: i64) -&gt; f64 {
    if a &gt; b {
        0.0
    } else {
        1.0 / (a as f64 * (a as f64 + 2.0)) + pi_sum(a + 4, b)
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>These three procedures clearly share a common underlying pattern.  They are for
the most part identical, differing only in the name of the procedure, the
function of <code class="code">a</code> used to compute the term to be added, and the function
that provides the next value of <code class="code">a</code>.  We could generate each of the
procedures by filling in slots in the same template:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn ⟨<var class="var">name</var>⟩(a: i64, b: i64) -&gt; i64 {
    if a &gt; b {
        0
    } else {
        ⟨<var class="var">term</var>⟩(a) + ⟨<var class="var">name</var>⟩(⟨<var class="var">next</var>⟩(a), b)
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>The presence of such a common pattern is strong evidence that there is a useful
abstraction waiting to be brought to the surface.  Indeed, mathematicians long
ago identified the abstraction of <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-summation-of-a-series"></a>
<em class="dfn">summation of a series</em> and invented
&ldquo;sigma notation,&rdquo; for example

\[ % :18:
 
{\sum_{n = a}^b f(n)} \,=\, {f(a)} + \dots + {f(b),}
\]

to express this concept.  The power of sigma notation is that it allows
mathematicians to deal with the concept of summation itself rather than only
with particular sums&mdash;for example, to formulate general results about sums
that are independent of the particular series being summed.
</p>
<p>Similarly, as program designers, we would like our language to be powerful
enough so that we can write a procedure that expresses the concept of summation
itself rather than only procedures that compute particular sums.  We can do so
readily in our procedural language by taking the common template shown above
and transforming the &ldquo;slots&rdquo; into formal parameters:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sum&lt;F, N&gt;(term: F, a: i64, next: N, b: i64) -&gt; i64
where
    F: Fn(i64) -&gt; i64,
    N: Fn(i64) -&gt; i64,
{
    if a &gt; b {
        0
    } else {
        term(a) + sum(term, next(a), next, b)
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>Notice that <code class="code">sum</code> takes as its arguments the lower and upper bounds
<code class="code">a</code> and <code class="code">b</code> together with the procedures <code class="code">term</code> and <code class="code">next</code>.
In Rust, we use generic type parameters <code class="code">F</code> and <code class="code">N</code> with trait bounds
<code class="code">Fn(i64) -&gt; i64</code> to specify that these parameters are functions that take
an <code class="code">i64</code> and return an <code class="code">i64</code>. The <code class="code">Fn</code> trait represents functions
and closures that can be called multiple times without consuming themselves.
We can use <code class="code">sum</code> just as we would any procedure.  For example, we can use
it (along with a procedure <code class="code">inc</code> that increments its argument by 1) to
define <code class="code">sum_cubes</code>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn inc(n: i64) -&gt; i64 {
    n + 1
}

fn sum_cubes(a: i64, b: i64) -&gt; i64 {
    sum(cube, a, inc, b)
}
</pre></div>

<p>Using this, we can compute the sum of the cubes of the integers from 1 to 10:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">sum_cubes(1, 10)
// =&gt; 3025
</pre></div>

<p>With the aid of an identity procedure to compute the term, we can define
<code class="code">sum_integers</code> in terms of <code class="code">sum</code>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn identity(x: i64) -&gt; i64 {
    x
}

fn sum_integers(a: i64, b: i64) -&gt; i64 {
    sum(identity, a, inc, b)
}
</pre></div>

<p>Then we can add up the integers from 1 to 10:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">sum_integers(1, 10)
// =&gt; 55
</pre></div>

<p>We can also define <code class="code">pi_sum</code> in the same way:<a class="footnote" id="DOCF45" href="#FOOT45"><sup>45</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn pi_sum(a: i64, b: i64) -&gt; f64 {
    fn pi_term(x: i64) -&gt; f64 {
        1.0 / (x as f64 * (x as f64 + 2.0))
    }
    fn pi_next(x: i64) -&gt; i64 {
        x + 4
    }
    sum(pi_term, a, pi_next, b) as f64
}
</pre></div>

<p>Using these procedures, we can compute an approximation to <em class="math">\pi</em>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">8.0 * pi_sum(1, 1000)
// =&gt; 3.139592655589783
</pre></div>

<p>Once we have <code class="code">sum</code>, we can use it as a building block in formulating
further concepts.  For instance, the definite integral of a function <em class="math">f</em>
between the limits <em class="math">a</em> and <em class="math">b</em> can be approximated numerically using the
formula

\[ % :19:
 
{\int_a^b \kern-0.3em f}
  \;=\; {\left[\;f\left(a + \frac{d x}{2}\right)\right.}
  \,+\, {f\left(a + dx + \frac{dx}{2}\right)}
  \,+\, {\left. f\left(a + 2dx + \frac{dx}{2}\right)
  \,+\, \dots \;\right] dx}
\]

for small values of <em class="math">{dx}</em>.  We can express this directly as a procedure:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn integral&lt;F&gt;(f: F, a: f64, b: f64, dx: f64) -&gt; f64
where
    F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
{
    fn sum_f64&lt;F, N&gt;(term: F, a: f64, next: N, b: f64) -&gt; f64
    where
        F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
        N: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
    {
        if a &gt; b {
            0.0
        } else {
            term(a) + sum_f64(term, next(a), next, b)
        }
    }

    let add_dx = |x| x + dx;
    sum_f64(f, a + dx / 2.0, add_dx, b) * dx
}

integral(|x| x * x * x, 0.0, 1.0, 0.01)
// =&gt; 0.24998750000000042

integral(|x| x * x * x, 0.0, 1.0, 0.001)
// =&gt; 0.249999875000001
</pre></div>

<p>(The exact value of the integral of <code class="code">cube</code> between 0 and 1 is 1/4.)
</p>
<p>Note that in the <code class="code">integral</code> function, we use Rust&rsquo;s closure syntax to define
<code class="code">add_dx</code>: the expression <code class="code">|x| x + dx</code> creates a closure that captures
the <code class="code">dx</code> variable from the enclosing scope. The vertical bars <code class="code">|...|</code>
enclose the parameter list, and the expression after them is the closure body.
We also pass a closure <code class="code">|x| x * x * x</code> directly as an argument to
<code class="code">integral</code>, demonstrating that closures can be created inline without
naming them.
</p>
<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e29"></a>Exercise 1.29:</strong> Simpson&rsquo;s Rule is a more accurate
method of numerical integration than the method illustrated above.  Using
Simpson&rsquo;s Rule, the integral of a function <em class="math">f</em> between <em class="math">a</em> and <em class="math">b</em> is
approximated as

\[ % :20:
  
\frac{h}{3}(y_0 + {4y_1} + {2y_2} + {4y_3} + {2y_4} + \dots + {2y_{n-2}} + {4y_{n-1} + y_n),}
\]

where <em class="math">{h = (b - a)/n}</em>, for some even integer <em class="math">n</em>, and
<em class="math">y_k = {f(a + kh)}</em>.  (Increasing <em class="math">n</em> increases the
accuracy of the approximation.)  Define a procedure that takes as arguments
<em class="math">f</em>, <em class="math">a</em>, <em class="math">b</em>, and <em class="math">n</em> and returns the value of the integral, computed
using Simpson&rsquo;s Rule.  Use your procedure to integrate <code class="code">cube</code> between 0
and 1 (with <em class="math">{n = 100}</em> and <em class="math">{n = 1000}</em>), and compare the results to those of
the <code class="code">integral</code> procedure shown above.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e30"></a>Exercise 1.30:</strong> The <code class="code">sum</code> procedure above
generates a linear recursion.  The procedure can be rewritten so that the sum
is performed iteratively.  Show how to do this by filling in the missing
expressions in the following definition:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sum&lt;F, N&gt;(term: F, a: i64, next: N, b: i64) -&gt; i64
where
    F: Fn(i64) -&gt; i64,
    N: Fn(i64) -&gt; i64,
{
    fn iter&lt;F, N&gt;(term: &amp;F, next: &amp;N, a: i64, b: i64, result: i64) -&gt; i64
    where
        F: Fn(i64) -&gt; i64,
        N: Fn(i64) -&gt; i64,
    {
        if ⟨??⟩ {
            ⟨??⟩
        } else {
            iter(term, next, ⟨??⟩, b, ⟨??⟩)
        }
    }
    iter(&amp;term, &amp;next, ⟨??⟩, b, ⟨??⟩)
}
</pre></div>
</blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e31"></a>Exercise 1.31:</strong> 
</p>
<ol class="enumerate" type="a" start="1">
<li> The <code class="code">sum</code> procedure is only the simplest of a vast number of similar
abstractions that can be captured as higher-order procedures.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF46" href="#FOOT46"><sup>46</sup></a>  Write an analogous
procedure called <code class="code">product</code> that returns the product of the values of a
function at points over a given range.  Show how to define <code class="code">factorial</code> in
terms of <code class="code">product</code>.  Also use <code class="code">product</code> to compute approximations to
<em class="math">\pi</em> using the formula<a class="footnote" id="DOCF47" href="#FOOT47"><sup>47</sup></a>

\[ % :21:
  
\frac{\pi}{4} \,=\, {\frac{2\cdot 4\cdot 4\cdot 6\cdot 6\cdot 8\cdot\cdots}
                     {3\cdot 3\cdot 5\cdot 5\cdot 7\cdot 7\cdot\cdots}.}
\]

</li><li> If your <code class="code">product</code> procedure generates a recursive process, write one that
generates an iterative process.  If it generates an iterative process, write
one that generates a recursive process.

</li></ol>
</blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e32"></a>Exercise 1.32:</strong> 
</p>
<ol class="enumerate" type="a" start="1">
<li> Show that <code class="code">sum</code> and <code class="code">product</code> (<a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e31">Exercise 1.31</a>) are both special
cases of a still more general notion called <code class="code">accumulate</code> that combines a
collection of terms, using some general accumulation function:

<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">accumulate(combiner, null_value, term, a, next, b)
</pre></div>

<p><code class="code">Accumulate</code> takes as arguments the same term and range specifications as
<code class="code">sum</code> and <code class="code">product</code>, together with a <code class="code">combiner</code> procedure (of
two arguments) that specifies how the current term is to be combined with the
accumulation of the preceding terms and a <code class="code">null-value</code> that specifies what
base value to use when the terms run out.  Write <code class="code">accumulate</code> and show how
<code class="code">sum</code> and <code class="code">product</code> can both be defined as simple calls to
<code class="code">accumulate</code>.
</p>
</li><li> If your <code class="code">accumulate</code> procedure generates a recursive process, write one
that generates an iterative process.  If it generates an iterative process,
write one that generates a recursive process.

</li></ol>
</blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e33"></a>Exercise 1.33:</strong> You can obtain an even more
general version of <code class="code">accumulate</code> (<a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e32">Exercise 1.32</a>) by introducing the
notion of a <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-filter"></a>
<em class="dfn">filter</em> on the terms to be combined.  That is, combine
only those terms derived from values in the range that satisfy a specified
condition.  The resulting <code class="code">filtered_accumulate</code> abstraction takes the same
arguments as accumulate, together with an additional predicate of one argument
that specifies the filter.  Write <code class="code">filtered_accumulate</code> as a procedure.
Show how to express the following using <code class="code">filtered_accumulate</code>:
</p>
<ol class="enumerate" type="a" start="1">
<li> the sum of the squares of the prime numbers in the interval <em class="math">a</em> to <em class="math">b</em>
(assuming that you have a <code class="code">is_prime</code> predicate already written)

</li><li> the product of all the positive integers less than <em class="math">n</em> that are relatively
prime to <em class="math">n</em> (i.e., all positive integers <em class="math">{i &lt; n}</em> such that
<em class="math">{\text{GCD}(i, n) = 1}</em>).

</li></ol>
</blockquote>

<hr>
</div>
<div class="subsection-level-extent" id="g_t1_002e3_002e2">
<h4 class="subsection" id="Constructing-Procedures-Using-Closures"><span>1.3.2 Constructing Procedures Using Closures<a class="copiable-link" href="#Constructing-Procedures-Using-Closures"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>In using <code class="code">sum</code> as in <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3_002e1">Procedures as Arguments</a>, it seems terribly awkward to
have to define trivial procedures such as <code class="code">pi_term</code> and <code class="code">pi_next</code>
just so we can use them as arguments to our higher-order procedure.  Rather
than define <code class="code">pi_next</code> and <code class="code">pi_term</code>, it would be more convenient to
have a way to directly specify &ldquo;the procedure that returns its input
incremented by 4&rdquo; and &ldquo;the procedure that returns the reciprocal of its input
times its input plus 2.&rdquo;  We can do this by using Rust\&rsquo;s <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-closure"></a>
<em class="dfn">closure</em>
syntax, which creates anonymous functions.  Using closures we can describe
what we want as
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">|x| x + 4
</pre></div>

<p>and
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">|x| 1.0 / (x * (x + 2.0))
</pre></div>

<p>Then our <code class="code">pi_sum</code> procedure can be expressed without defining any
auxiliary procedures as
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn pi_sum(a: i32, b: i32) -&gt; f64 {
    sum(|x| 1.0 / (x as f64 * (x as f64 + 2.0)),
        a,
        |x| x + 4,
        b)
}
</pre></div>

<p>Again using closures, we can write the <code class="code">integral</code> procedure without
having to define the auxiliary procedure <code class="code">add_dx</code>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn integral&lt;F&gt;(f: F, a: f64, b: f64, dx: f64) -&gt; f64
where
    F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
{
    sum(f, a + dx / 2.0, |x| x + dx, b) * dx
}
</pre></div>

<p>In general, closures are used to create anonymous functions in the same way as
<code class="code">fn</code>, except that no name is specified for the function:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">|⟨<var class="var">formal-parameters</var>⟩| ⟨<var class="var">body</var>⟩
</pre></div>

<p>The resulting closure is just as much a function as one that is created
using <code class="code">fn</code>.  The only difference is that it has not been associated
with any name in the environment.  In fact,
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn plus4(x: i32) -&gt; i32 { x + 4 }
</pre></div>

<p>is equivalent to
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let plus4 = |x: i32| x + 4;
</pre></div>

<p>We can read a closure expression as follows:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">|       x       |       x   +     4
|       |       |       |   |     |
the function of an argument x that adds x and 4
</pre></div>

<p>Like any expression that has a function as its value, a closure
expression can be used immediately such as
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">(|x, y, z| x + y + square(z))(1, 2, 3)
// =&gt; 12
</pre></div>

<p>or, more generally, in any context where we would normally use a function
name.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF48" href="#FOOT48"><sup>48</sup></a>
</p>
<h4 class="subsubheading" id="Using-let-to-create-local-variables"><span>Using <code class="code">let</code> to create local variables<a class="copiable-link" href="#Using-let-to-create-local-variables"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>In Rust, the <code class="code">let</code> keyword is used to create local variables.  We often need
local variables in our procedures other than those that have been bound as
formal parameters.  For example, suppose we wish to compute the function

\[ % :22:
  
{f(x,y)} \,=\, {x(1 + xy)^2} + {y(1 - y)} + {(1 + xy)(1 - y),}
\]

which we could also express as

\[ % :23:
 
\begin{eqnarray}
  a                     &amp;=&amp;   {1 + xy,}  \\
  \hphantom{(x,y)} b    &amp;=&amp;   {1 - y,}   \\
  {f(x,y)}              &amp;=&amp;   {xa^2} + {yb} + {ab.}
\end{eqnarray}
\]

In writing a procedure to compute <em class="math">f</em>, we would like to include as local
variables not only <em class="math">x</em> and <em class="math">y</em> but also the names of intermediate
quantities like <em class="math">a</em> and <em class="math">b</em>.  One way to accomplish this is to use an
auxiliary procedure to bind the local variables:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn f(x: f64, y: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    fn f_helper(x: f64, y: f64, a: f64, b: f64) -&gt; f64 {
        x * square(a) + y * b + a * b
    }
    f_helper(x, y, 1.0 + x * y, 1.0 - y)
}
</pre></div>

<p>Of course, we could use a closure to specify an anonymous
function for binding our local variables.  The body of <code class="code">f</code> then becomes a
single call to that closure:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn f(x: f64, y: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    (|a, b| x * square(a) + y * b + a * b)(1.0 + x * y, 1.0 - y)
}
</pre></div>

<p>In Rust, <code class="code">let</code> bindings are a natural and convenient way to create
local variables.  Using <code class="code">let</code>, the <code class="code">f</code> procedure could
be written as
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn f(x: f64, y: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    let a = 1.0 + x * y;
    let b = 1.0 - y;
    x * square(a) + y * b + a * b
}
</pre></div>

<p>The general form of a <code class="code">let</code> binding in Rust is
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let ⟨<var class="var">var₁</var>⟩ = ⟨<var class="var">exp₁</var>⟩;
let ⟨<var class="var">var₂</var>⟩ = ⟨<var class="var">exp₂</var>⟩;
<span class="r">…</span>
let ⟨<var class="var">varₙ</var>⟩ = ⟨<var class="var">expₙ</var>⟩;
⟨<var class="var">body</var>⟩
</pre></div>

<p>which can be thought of as saying
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let ⟨<var class="var">var₁</var>⟩ <span class="r">have the value</span> ⟨<var class="var">exp₁</var>⟩ <span class="r">and</span>
    ⟨<var class="var">var₂</var>⟩ <span class="r">have the value</span> ⟨<var class="var">exp₂</var>⟩ <span class="r">and</span>
    <span class="r">…</span>
    ⟨<var class="var">varₙ</var>⟩ <span class="r">have the value</span> ⟨<var class="var">expₙ</var>⟩
  <span class="r">in</span> ⟨<var class="var">body</var>⟩
</pre></div>

<p>Each <code class="code">let</code> binding associates a name with the value of the
corresponding expression.  The body of the function is evaluated with these
names bound as local variables.  In Rust, <code class="code">let</code> bindings are evaluated
sequentially, which means each binding can use the values of previous bindings.
This is similar to using immediately-invoked closures:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">(|⟨<var class="var">var₁</var>⟩, <span class="r">…</span>, ⟨<var class="var">varₙ</var>⟩| ⟨<var class="var">body</var>⟩)(⟨<var class="var">exp₁</var>⟩, <span class="r">…</span>, ⟨<var class="var">expₙ</var>⟩)
</pre></div>

<p>While Rust\&rsquo;s <code class="code">let</code> is a fundamental language construct rather than
syntactic sugar, the conceptual relationship to closures helps understand
how local variables create scoped bindings.
</p>
<p>The scope of a variable specified by a
<code class="code">let</code> binding is from the point of binding to the end of the enclosing block.  This implies that:
</p>
<ul class="itemize mark-bullet">
<li><code class="code">Let</code> allows one to bind variables as locally as possible to where they
are to be used.  For example, if the value of <code class="code">x</code> is 5, the value of the
expression

<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">{
    let inner_result = {
        let x = 3;
        x + x * 10
    };
    inner_result + x
}
</pre></div>

<p>is 38.  Here, the <code class="code">x</code> in the inner block is 3, so the value of
the inner expression is 33.  On the other hand, the <code class="code">x</code> that is the
second argument to the outermost <code class="code">+</code> is still 5.
</p>
</li><li>In Rust, <code class="code">let</code> bindings are evaluated sequentially.  This matters when
the expressions that provide the values for the local variables depend upon
variables having the same names as the local variables themselves.  For
example, if the value of <code class="code">x</code> is 2, the expression

<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">{
    let x = 3;
    let y = x + 2;
    x * y
}
</pre></div>

<p>will have the value 15 because <code class="code">y</code> uses the new value of <code class="code">x</code> (which is 3),
so <code class="code">y</code> will be 5, and <code class="code">x</code> * <code class="code">y</code> = 15.  This is different from
Scheme\&rsquo;s <code class="code">let</code>, where all bindings are evaluated before any are bound.
</p>
</li></ul>

<p>In Rust, <code class="code">let</code> bindings are the natural way to define local variables
within a function.  For example, the procedure <code class="code">f</code> above was written as
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn f(x: f64, y: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    let a = 1.0 + x * y;
    let b = 1.0 - y;
    x * square(a) + y * b + a * b
}
</pre></div>

<p>We use <code class="code">let</code> bindings for local variables and values, while we use
internal <code class="code">fn</code> definitions only for internal helper functions.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF49" href="#FOOT49"><sup>49</sup></a>
</p>
<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e34"></a>Exercise 1.34:</strong> Suppose we define the function
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn f&lt;F&gt;(g: F) -&gt; i32
where
    F: Fn(i32) -&gt; i32,
{
    g(2)
}
</pre></div>

<p>Then we have
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">f(square)
// =&gt; 4

f(|z| z * (z + 1))
// =&gt; 6
</pre></div>

<p>What happens if we (perversely) ask the compiler to evaluate the call
<code class="code">f(f)</code>?  Explain.
</p></blockquote>

<hr>
</div>
<div class="subsection-level-extent" id="g_t1_002e3_002e3">
<h4 class="subsection" id="Procedures-as-General-Methods"><span>1.3.3 Procedures as General Methods<a class="copiable-link" href="#Procedures-as-General-Methods"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>We introduced compound procedures in <a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e4">Compound Procedures</a> as a mechanism for
abstracting patterns of numerical operations so as to make them independent of
the particular numbers involved.  With higher-order procedures, such as the
<code class="code">integral</code> procedure of <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3_002e1">Procedures as Arguments</a>, we began to see a more
powerful kind of abstraction: procedures used to express general methods of
computation, independent of the particular functions involved.  In this section
we discuss two more elaborate examples&mdash;general methods for finding zeros and
fixed points of functions&mdash;and show how these methods can be expressed
directly as procedures.
</p>
<h4 class="subsubheading" id="Finding-roots-of-equations-by-the-half_002dinterval-method"><span>Finding roots of equations by the half-interval method<a class="copiable-link" href="#Finding-roots-of-equations-by-the-half_002dinterval-method"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>The <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-half_002dinterval-method"></a>
<em class="dfn">half-interval method</em> is a simple but powerful technique for
finding roots of an equation <em class="math">{f(x) = 0}</em>, where <em class="math">f</em> is a continuous
function.  The idea is that, if we are given points <em class="math">a</em> and <em class="math">b</em> such that
<em class="math">{f(a) &lt; 0 &lt; f(b)}</em>, then <em class="math">f</em> must have at least one zero between
<em class="math">a</em> and <em class="math">b</em>.  To locate a zero, let <em class="math">x</em> be the average of <em class="math">a</em> and <em class="math">b</em>,
and compute <em class="math">{f(x)}</em>.  If <em class="math">{f(x) &gt; 0}</em>, then <em class="math">f</em> must have a zero
between <em class="math">a</em> and <em class="math">x</em>.  If <em class="math">{f(x) &lt; 0}</em>, then <em class="math">f</em> must have a zero
between <em class="math">x</em> and <em class="math">b</em>.  Continuing in this way, we can identify smaller and
smaller intervals on which <em class="math">f</em> must have a zero.  When we reach a point where
the interval is small enough, the process stops.  Since the interval of
uncertainty is reduced by half at each step of the process, the number of steps
required grows as <em class="math">{\Theta(\log(L\, /\, T))}</em>, where <em class="math">L</em> is the
length of the original interval and <em class="math">T</em> is the error tolerance (that is, the
size of the interval we will consider &ldquo;small enough&rdquo;).  Here is a procedure
that implements this strategy:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn search&lt;F&gt;(f: F, neg_point: f64, pos_point: f64) -&gt; f64
where
    F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
{
    let midpoint = average(neg_point, pos_point);
    if close_enough(neg_point, pos_point) {
        midpoint
    } else {
        let test_value = f(midpoint);
        if test_value &gt; 0.0 {
            search(f, neg_point, midpoint)
        } else if test_value &lt; 0.0 {
            search(f, midpoint, pos_point)
        } else {
            midpoint
        }
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>We assume that we are initially given the function <em class="math">f</em> together with points
at which its values are negative and positive.  We first compute the midpoint
of the two given points.  Next we check to see if the given interval is small
enough, and if so we simply return the midpoint as our answer.  Otherwise, we
compute as a test value the value of <em class="math">f</em> at the midpoint.  If the test value
is positive, then we continue the process with a new interval running from the
original negative point to the midpoint.  If the test value is negative, we
continue with the interval from the midpoint to the positive point.  Finally,
there is the possibility that the test value is 0, in which case the midpoint
is itself the root we are searching for.
</p>
<p>To test whether the endpoints are &ldquo;close enough&rdquo; we can use a procedure
similar to the one used in <a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e7">Example: Square Roots by Newton&rsquo;s Method</a> for computing square
roots:<a class="footnote" id="DOCF50" href="#FOOT50"><sup>50</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn close_enough(x: f64, y: f64) -&gt; bool {
    (x - y).abs() &lt; 0.001
}
</pre></div>

<p><code class="code">Search</code> is awkward to use directly, because we can accidentally give it
points at which <em class="math">f</em>&rsquo;s values do not have the required sign, in which case we
get a wrong answer.  Instead we will use <code class="code">search</code> via the following
procedure, which checks to see which of the endpoints has a negative function
value and which has a positive value, and calls the <code class="code">search</code> procedure
accordingly.  If the function has the same sign on the two given points, the
half-interval method cannot be used, in which case the procedure signals an
error.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF51" href="#FOOT51"><sup>51</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn half_interval_method&lt;F&gt;(f: F, a: f64, b: f64) -&gt; f64
where
    F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
{
    let a_value = f(a);
    let b_value = f(b);
    if a_value &lt; 0.0 &amp;&amp; b_value &gt; 0.0 {
        search(f, a, b)
    } else if b_value &lt; 0.0 &amp;&amp; a_value &gt; 0.0 {
        search(f, b, a)
    } else {
        panic!(&quot;Values are not of opposite sign {} {}&quot;, a, b)
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>The following example uses the half-interval method to approximate <em class="math">\pi</em> as
the root between 2 and 4 of <em class="math">{\sin x = 0}</em>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">half_interval_method(f64::sin, 2.0, 4.0)
// =&gt; 3.14111328125
</pre></div>

<p>Here is another example, using the half-interval method to search for a root of
the equation <em class="math">{x^3 - 2x - 3 = 0}</em> between 1 and 2:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">half_interval_method(
    |x| x * x * x - 2.0 * x - 3.0,
    1.0,
    2.0
)
// =&gt; 1.89306640625
</pre></div>

<h4 class="subsubheading" id="Finding-fixed-points-of-functions"><span>Finding fixed points of functions<a class="copiable-link" href="#Finding-fixed-points-of-functions"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>A number <em class="math">x</em> is called a <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-fixed-point"></a>
<em class="dfn">fixed point</em> of a function <em class="math">f</em> if <em class="math">x</em>
satisfies the equation <em class="math">{f(x) = x}</em>.  For some functions <em class="math">f</em> we can
locate a fixed point by beginning with an initial guess and applying <em class="math">f</em>
repeatedly,

\[ % :24:
  
{f(x),}\quad {f(f(x)),}\quad {f(f(f(x))),} \quad{\dots,}
\]

until the value does not change very much.  Using this idea, we can devise a
procedure <code class="code">fixed_point</code> that takes as inputs a function and an initial
guess and produces an approximation to a fixed point of the function.  We apply
the function repeatedly until we find two successive values whose difference is
less than some prescribed tolerance:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">const TOLERANCE: f64 = 0.00001;

fn fixed_point&lt;F&gt;(f: F, first_guess: f64) -&gt; f64
where
    F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
{
    fn close_enough(v1: f64, v2: f64) -&gt; bool {
        (v1 - v2).abs() &lt; TOLERANCE
    }
    fn try_guess&lt;F&gt;(f: &amp;F, guess: f64) -&gt; f64
    where
        F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
    {
        let next = f(guess);
        if close_enough(guess, next) {
            next
        } else {
            try_guess(f, next)
        }
    }
    try_guess(&amp;f, first_guess)
}
</pre></div>

<p>For example, we can use this method to approximate the fixed point of the
cosine function, starting with 1 as an initial approximation:<a class="footnote" id="DOCF52" href="#FOOT52"><sup>52</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fixed_point(f64::cos, 1.0)
// =&gt; 0.7390822985224023
</pre></div>

<p>Similarly, we can find a solution to the equation 
<em class="math">{y = \sin y + \cos y}</em>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fixed_point(|y| y.sin() + y.cos(), 1.0)
// =&gt; 1.2587315962971173
</pre></div>

<p>The fixed-point process is reminiscent of the process we used for finding
square roots in <a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e7">Example: Square Roots by Newton&rsquo;s Method</a>.  Both are based on the idea of repeatedly
improving a guess until the result satisfies some criterion.  In fact, we can
readily formulate the square-root computation as a fixed-point search.
Computing the square root of some number <em class="math">x</em> requires finding a <em class="math">y</em> such
that <em class="math">{y^2 = x}</em>.  Putting this equation into the equivalent form 
<em class="math">{y = x / y}</em>, we recognize that we are looking for a fixed point of the
function<a class="footnote" id="DOCF53" href="#FOOT53"><sup>53</sup></a> <em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y}</em>, 
and we can therefore try to compute square roots as
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sqrt(x: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    fixed_point(|y| x / y, 1.0)
}
</pre></div>

<p>Unfortunately, this fixed-point search does not converge.  Consider an initial
guess <em class="math">y_1</em>.  The next guess is <em class="math">{y_2 = x / y_1}</em> and the next guess is
<em class="math">y_3 = {x / y_2} = {x / (x / y_1)} = y_1</em>.  This results in an
infinite loop in which the two guesses <em class="math">y_1</em> and <em class="math">y_2</em> repeat over and
over, oscillating about the answer.
</p>
<p>One way to control such oscillations is to prevent the guesses from changing so
much.  Since the answer is always between our guess <em class="math">y</em> and <em class="math">{x / y}</em>, we
can make a new guess that is not as far from <em class="math">y</em> as <em class="math">{x / y}</em> by averaging
<em class="math">y</em> with <em class="math">{x / y}</em>, so that the next guess after <em class="math">y</em> is 
<em class="math">{{1\over2}(y + x / y)}</em> 
instead of <em class="math">{x / y}</em>.  The process of making such a sequence of
guesses is simply the process of looking for a fixed point of 
<em class="math">y \mapsto {{1\over2}(y + x / y)}</em>: 
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sqrt(x: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    fixed_point(|y| average(y, x / y), 1.0)
}
</pre></div>

<p>(Note that <em class="math">y = {{1\over2}(y + x / y)}</em> is a simple transformation of the
equation <em class="math">{y = x / y;}</em> to derive it, add <em class="math">y</em> to both sides of the
equation and divide by 2.)
</p>
<p>With this modification, the square-root procedure works.  In fact, if we
unravel the definitions, we can see that the sequence of approximations to the
square root generated here is precisely the same as the one generated by our
original square-root procedure of <a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e7">Example: Square Roots by Newton&rsquo;s Method</a>.  This approach of
averaging successive approximations to a solution, a technique that we call
<a class="index-entry-id" id="index-average-damping"></a>
<em class="dfn">average damping</em>, often aids the convergence of fixed-point searches.
</p>
<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e35"></a>Exercise 1.35:</strong> Show that the golden ratio
<em class="math">\varphi</em> (<a class="ref" href="1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e2">Tree Recursion</a>) is a fixed point of the transformation 
<em class="math">{x \mapsto 1 + 1 / x}</em>, and use this fact to compute <em class="math">\varphi</em> by means 
of the <code class="code">fixed_point</code> procedure.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e36"></a>Exercise 1.36:</strong> Modify <code class="code">fixed_point</code> so that
it prints the sequence of approximations it generates, using the <code class="code">newline</code>
and <code class="code">display</code> primitives shown in <a class="ref" href="1_002e2.xhtml#Exercise-1_002e22">Exercise 1.22</a>.  Then find a
solution to <em class="math">{x^x = 1000}</em> by finding a fixed point of <em class="math">x \mapsto
{\log(1000) / \log(x)}</em>.  (Use Scheme&rsquo;s primitive <code class="code">log</code>
procedure, which computes natural logarithms.)  Compare the number of steps
this takes with and without average damping.  (Note that you cannot start
<code class="code">fixed_point</code> with a guess of 1, as this would cause division by
<em class="math">{\log(1) = 0}</em>.)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e37"></a>Exercise 1.37:</strong> 
</p>
<ol class="enumerate" type="a" start="1">
<li> An infinite <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-continued-fraction"></a>
<em class="dfn">continued fraction</em> is an expression of the form

\[ % :25:
  
f \,=\, {\frac{N_1}{D_1 + \frac{N_2}{D_2 + \frac{N_3}{D_3 + \dots}}}.}
\]

As an example, one can show that the infinite continued fraction expansion with
the <em class="math">N_i</em> and the <em class="math">D_i</em> all equal to 1 produces <em class="math">{1 / \varphi}</em>, where
<em class="math">\varphi</em> is the golden ratio (described in <a class="ref" href="1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e2">Tree Recursion</a>).  One way to
approximate an infinite continued fraction is to truncate the expansion after a
given number of terms.  Such a truncation&mdash;a so-called <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-k_002dterm"></a>
finite continued fraction
<em class="dfn"><i class="i">k</i>-term
finite continued fraction</em>&mdash;has the form

\[ % :26:
  
{\frac{N_1}{D_1 + \frac{N_2}{\ddots + \frac{N_k}{D_k}}}.}
\]

Suppose that <code class="code">n</code> and <code class="code">d</code> are procedures of one argument (the term
index <em class="math">i</em>) that return the <em class="math">N_i</em> and <em class="math">D_i</em> of the terms of the
continued fraction.  Define a procedure <code class="code">cont_frac</code> such that evaluating
<code class="code">(cont-frac n d k)</code> computes the value of the <em class="math">k</em>-term finite continued
fraction.  Check your procedure by approximating <em class="math">{1 / \varphi}</em> using

<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">cont_frac(|_i| 1.0, |_i| 1.0, k)
</pre></div>

<p>for successive values of <code class="code">k</code>.  How large must you make <code class="code">k</code> in order
to get an approximation that is accurate to 4 decimal places?
</p>
</li><li> If your <code class="code">cont_frac</code> procedure generates a recursive process, write one
that generates an iterative process.  If it generates an iterative process,
write one that generates a recursive process.

</li></ol>
</blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e38"></a>Exercise 1.38:</strong> In 1737, the Swiss mathematician
Leonhard Euler published a memoir <cite class="cite">De Fractionibus Continuis</cite>, which
included a continued fraction expansion for <em class="math">{e - 2}</em>, where <em class="math">e</em> is the base
of the natural logarithms.  In this fraction, the <em class="math">N_i</em> are all 1, and
the <em class="math">D_i</em> are successively 1, 2, 1, 1, 4, 1, 1, 6, 1, 1, 8, &hellip;.
Write a program that uses your <code class="code">cont_frac</code> procedure from <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e37">Exercise 1.37</a> 
to approximate <em class="math">e</em>, based on Euler&rsquo;s expansion.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e39"></a>Exercise 1.39:</strong> A continued fraction
representation of the tangent function was published in 1770 by the German
mathematician J.H. Lambert:

\[ % :27:
  
{\tan x} \,=\, {\frac{x}{1 - \frac{x^2}{3 - \frac{x^2}{5 - \dots}}}\,,}
\]

where <em class="math">x</em> is in radians.  Define a procedure <code class="code">(tan_cf x k)</code> that
computes an approximation to the tangent function based on Lambert&rsquo;s formula.
<code class="code">k</code> specifies the number of terms to compute, as in <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e37">Exercise 1.37</a>.
</p></blockquote>

<hr>
</div>
<div class="subsection-level-extent" id="g_t1_002e3_002e4">
<h4 class="subsection" id="Procedures-as-Returned-Values"><span>1.3.4 Procedures as Returned Values<a class="copiable-link" href="#Procedures-as-Returned-Values"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>The above examples demonstrate how the ability to pass procedures as arguments
significantly enhances the expressive power of our programming language.  We
can achieve even more expressive power by creating procedures whose returned
values are themselves procedures.
</p>
<p>We can illustrate this idea by looking again at the fixed-point example
described at the end of <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3_002e3">Procedures as General Methods</a>.  We formulated a new version of
the square-root procedure as a fixed-point search, starting with the
observation that <em class="math">\sqrt{x}</em> is a fixed-point of the function <em class="math">{y \mapsto
x / y}</em>.  Then we used average damping to make the approximations converge.
Average damping is a useful general technique in itself.  Namely, given a
function <em class="math">f</em>, we consider the function whose value at <em class="math">x</em> is equal to the
average of <em class="math">x</em> and <em class="math">{f(x)}</em>.
</p>
<p>We can express the idea of average damping by means of the following procedure:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn average_damp&lt;F&gt;(f: F) -&gt; impl Fn(f64) -&gt; f64
where
    F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64 + 'static,
{
    move |x| average(x, f(x))
}
</pre></div>

<p>In Rust, returning a closure requires using <code class="code">impl Fn</code> as the return type.
The <code class="code">move</code> keyword captures <code class="code">f</code> by value, transferring ownership into
the returned closure. This is necessary because the closure outlives the function
scope. The <code class="code">'static</code> lifetime bound ensures <code class="code">f</code> doesn&rsquo;t contain references
with limited lifetimes.
</p>
<p><code class="code">Average-damp</code> is a procedure that takes as its argument a procedure
<code class="code">f</code> and returns as its value a procedure (produced by the closure)
that, when applied to a number <code class="code">x</code>, produces the average of <code class="code">x</code> and
<code class="code">f(x)</code>.  For example, applying <code class="code">average_damp</code> to the <code class="code">square</code>
procedure produces a procedure whose value at some number <em class="math">x</em> is the average
of <em class="math">x</em> and <em class="math">x^2</em>.  Applying this resulting procedure to 10 returns the
average of 10 and 100, or 55:<a class="footnote" id="DOCF54" href="#FOOT54"><sup>54</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">average_damp(square)(10.0)
// =&gt; 55.0
</pre></div>

<p>Using <code class="code">average_damp</code>, we can reformulate the square-root procedure as
follows:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sqrt(x: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    fixed_point(
        average_damp(move |y| x / y),
        1.0,
    )
}
</pre></div>

<p>Notice how this formulation makes explicit the three ideas in the method:
fixed-point search, average damping, and the function <em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y}</em>.
It is instructive to compare this formulation of the square-root method with
the original version given in <a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e7">Example: Square Roots by Newton&rsquo;s Method</a>.  Bear in mind that these
procedures express the same process, and notice how much clearer the idea
becomes when we express the process in terms of these abstractions.  In
general, there are many ways to formulate a process as a procedure.
Experienced programmers know how to choose procedural formulations that are
particularly perspicuous, and where useful elements of the process are exposed
as separate entities that can be reused in other applications.  As a simple
example of reuse, notice that the cube root of <em class="math">x</em> is a fixed point of the
function <em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y^2}</em>, so we can immediately generalize our
square-root procedure to one that extracts cube roots:<a class="footnote" id="DOCF55" href="#FOOT55"><sup>55</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn cube_root(x: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    fixed_point(
        average_damp(move |y| x / square(y)),
        1.0,
    )
}
</pre></div>

<h4 class="subsubheading" id="Newton_0027s-method"><span>Newton&rsquo;s method<a class="copiable-link" href="#Newton_0027s-method"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>When we first introduced the square-root procedure, in <a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e7">Example: Square Roots by Newton&rsquo;s Method</a>, we
mentioned that this was a special case of <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-Newton_0027s-method"></a>
<em class="dfn">Newton&rsquo;s method</em>.  
If <em class="math">{x \mapsto g(x)}</em> is a differentiable function, then a solution of the equation
<em class="math">{g(x) = 0}</em> is a fixed point of the function <em class="math">{x \mapsto f(x)}</em> where

\[ % :28:
  
{f(x)} \,=\, x - \frac{g(x)}{D g(x)}
\]

and <em class="math">{Dg(x)}</em> is the derivative of <em class="math">g</em> evaluated at <em class="math">x</em>.  Newton&rsquo;s
method is the use of the fixed-point method we saw above to approximate a
solution of the equation by finding a fixed point of the function
<em class="math">{f}</em>.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF56" href="#FOOT56"><sup>56</sup></a>
</p>
<p>For many functions <em class="math">g</em> and for sufficiently good initial guesses for <em class="math">x</em>,
Newton&rsquo;s method converges very rapidly to a solution of <em class="math">{g(x) = 0}</em>.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF57" href="#FOOT57"><sup>57</sup></a>
</p>
<p>In order to implement Newton&rsquo;s method as a procedure, we must first express the
idea of derivative.  Note that &ldquo;derivative,&rdquo; like average damping, is
something that transforms a function into another function.  For instance, the
derivative of the function <em class="math">{x \mapsto x^3}</em> is the function <em class="math">{x \mapsto 3x^2}</em>.
In general, if <em class="math">g</em> is a function and <em class="math">{dx}</em> is a small number,
then the derivative <em class="math">{Dg}</em> of <em class="math">g</em> is the function whose value at any
number <em class="math">x</em> is given (in the limit of small <em class="math">{dx}</em>) by

\[ % :29:
  
Dg(x) \,=\, {\frac{g(x + dx) - g(x)}{dx}.}
\]

Thus, we can express the idea of derivative (taking <em class="math">{dx}</em> to be, say,
0.00001) as the procedure
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">const DX: f64 = 0.00001;

fn deriv&lt;G&gt;(g: G) -&gt; impl Fn(f64) -&gt; f64
where
    G: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64 + 'static,
{
    move |x| (g(x + DX) - g(x)) / DX
}
</pre></div>

<p>Like <code class="code">average_damp</code>, <code class="code">deriv</code> is a procedure that takes a procedure as
argument and returns a procedure as value.  For example, to approximate the
derivative of <em class="math">{x \mapsto x^3}</em> at 5 (whose exact value is 75) we can evaluate
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn cube(x: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    x * x * x
}

deriv(cube)(5.0)
// =&gt; 75.00014999664018
</pre></div>

<p>With the aid of <code class="code">deriv</code>, we can express Newton&rsquo;s method as a fixed-point
process:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn newton_transform&lt;G&gt;(g: G) -&gt; impl Fn(f64) -&gt; f64
where
    G: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64 + Clone + 'static,
{
    let g_clone = g.clone();
    move |x| x - (g(x) / deriv(g_clone.clone())(x))
}

fn newtons_method&lt;G&gt;(g: G, guess: f64) -&gt; f64
where
    G: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64 + Clone + 'static,
{
    fixed_point(newton_transform(g), guess)
}
</pre></div>

<p>Here, <code class="code">newton_transform</code> requires <code class="code">G: Clone</code> because we need to use
<code class="code">g</code> both directly and pass it to <code class="code">deriv</code>. We clone <code class="code">g</code> to satisfy
Rust&rsquo;s ownership rules.
</p>
<p>The <code class="code">newton_transform</code> procedure expresses the formula at the beginning of
this section, and <code class="code">newtons_method</code> is readily defined in terms of this.
It takes as arguments a procedure that computes the function for which we want
to find a zero, together with an initial guess.  For instance, to find the
square root of <em class="math">x</em>, we can use Newton&rsquo;s method to find a zero of the function
<em class="math">{y \mapsto y^2 - x}</em> starting with an initial guess of 1.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF58" href="#FOOT58"><sup>58</sup></a>
</p>
<p>This provides yet another form of the square-root procedure:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sqrt(x: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    newtons_method(move |y| square(y) - x, 1.0)
}
</pre></div>

<h4 class="subsubheading" id="Abstractions-and-first_002dclass-procedures"><span>Abstractions and first-class procedures<a class="copiable-link" href="#Abstractions-and-first_002dclass-procedures"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>We&rsquo;ve seen two ways to express the square-root computation as an instance of a
more general method, once as a fixed-point search and once using Newton&rsquo;s
method.  Since Newton&rsquo;s method was itself expressed as a fixed-point process,
we actually saw two ways to compute square roots as fixed points.  Each method
begins with a function and finds a fixed point of some transformation of the
function.  We can express this general idea itself as a procedure:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn fixed_point_of_transform&lt;G, T, F&gt;(g: G, transform: T, guess: f64) -&gt; f64
where
    G: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64 + 'static,
    T: Fn(G) -&gt; F,
    F: Fn(f64) -&gt; f64,
{
    fixed_point(transform(g), guess)
}
</pre></div>

<p>This function takes a function <code class="code">g</code>, a <code class="code">transform</code> that converts one
function into another, and an initial <code class="code">guess</code>. The generic parameters
<code class="code">G</code>, <code class="code">T</code>, and <code class="code">F</code> allow flexible composition of different function
transformations.
</p>
<p>This very general procedure takes as its arguments a procedure <code class="code">g</code> that
computes some function, a procedure that transforms <code class="code">g</code>, and an initial
guess.  The returned result is a fixed point of the transformed function.
</p>
<p>Using this abstraction, we can recast the first square-root computation from
this section (where we look for a fixed point of the average-damped version of
<em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y}</em>) as an instance of this general method:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sqrt(x: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    fixed_point_of_transform(move |y| x / y, average_damp, 1.0)
}
</pre></div>

<p>Similarly, we can express the second square-root computation from this section
(an instance of Newton&rsquo;s method that finds a fixed point of the Newton
transform of <em class="math">{y \mapsto y^2 - x}</em>) as
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sqrt(x: f64) -&gt; f64 {
    fixed_point_of_transform(move |y| square(y) - x, newton_transform, 1.0)
}
</pre></div>

<p>We began section <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3">Formulating Abstractions with Higher-Order Procedures</a> with the observation that compound procedures are a
crucial abstraction mechanism, because they permit us to express general
methods of computing as explicit elements in our programming language.  Now
we&rsquo;ve seen how higher-order procedures permit us to manipulate these general
methods to create further abstractions.
</p>
<p>As programmers, we should be alert to opportunities to identify the underlying
abstractions in our programs and to build upon them and generalize them to
create more powerful abstractions.  This is not to say that one should always
write programs in the most abstract way possible; expert programmers know how
to choose the level of abstraction appropriate to their task.  But it is
important to be able to think in terms of these abstractions, so that we can be
ready to apply them in new contexts.  The significance of higher-order
procedures is that they enable us to represent these abstractions explicitly as
elements in our programming language, so that they can be handled just like
other computational elements.
</p>
<p>In general, programming languages impose restrictions on the ways in which
computational elements can be manipulated.  Elements with the fewest
restrictions are said to have <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-first_002dclass"></a>
<em class="dfn">first-class</em> status.  Some of the
&ldquo;rights and privileges&rdquo; of first-class elements are:<a class="footnote" id="DOCF59" href="#FOOT59"><sup>59</sup></a>
</p>
<ul class="itemize mark-bullet">
<li>They may be named by variables.

</li><li>They may be passed as arguments to procedures.

</li><li>They may be returned as the results of procedures.

</li><li>They may be included in data structures.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF60" href="#FOOT60"><sup>60</sup></a>

</li></ul>

<p>Lisp, unlike other common programming languages, awards procedures full
first-class status.  This poses challenges for efficient implementation, but
the resulting gain in expressive power is enormous.<a class="footnote" id="DOCF61" href="#FOOT61"><sup>61</sup></a>
</p>
<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e40"></a>Exercise 1.40:</strong> Define a procedure <code class="code">cubic</code>
that can be used together with the <code class="code">newtons_method</code> procedure in
expressions of the form
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">newtons_method(cubic(a, b, c), 1.0)
</pre></div>

<p>to approximate zeros of the cubic <em class="math">{x^3 + ax^2 + bx + c}</em>.
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn cubic(a: f64, b: f64, c: f64) -&gt; impl Fn(f64) -&gt; f64 {
    move |x| x.powi(3) + a * x.powi(2) + b * x + c
}
</pre></div>
</blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e41"></a>Exercise 1.41:</strong> Define a procedure <code class="code">double</code>
that takes a procedure of one argument as argument and returns a procedure that
applies the original procedure twice.  For example, if <code class="code">inc</code> is a
procedure that adds 1 to its argument, then <code class="code">double(inc)</code> should be a
procedure that adds 2.  What value is returned by
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">double(double(double))(inc)(5)
</pre></div>

<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn double&lt;F, T&gt;(f: F) -&gt; impl Fn(T) -&gt; T
where
    F: Fn(T) -&gt; T + Clone + 'static,
    T: 'static,
{
    move |x| f(f(x))
}
</pre></div>

<p>In Rust, <code class="code">double</code> is polymorphic over type <code class="code">T</code>, allowing it to work
with any type. The <code class="code">Clone</code> bound is required because we apply <code class="code">f</code> twice.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e42"></a>Exercise 1.42:</strong> Let <em class="math">f</em> and <em class="math">g</em> be two
one-argument functions.  The <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-composition"></a>
<em class="dfn">composition</em> <em class="math">f</em> after <em class="math">g</em> is defined
to be the function <em class="math">{x \mapsto f(g(x))}</em>.  Define a procedure
<code class="code">compose</code> that implements composition.  For example, if <code class="code">inc</code> is a
procedure that adds 1 to its argument,
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">compose(square, inc)(6)
// =&gt; 49
</pre></div>

<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn compose&lt;F, G, T, U, V&gt;(f: F, g: G) -&gt; impl Fn(T) -&gt; V
where
    F: Fn(U) -&gt; V + 'static,
    G: Fn(T) -&gt; U + 'static,
    T: 'static,
    U: 'static,
    V: 'static,
{
    move |x| f(g(x))
}
</pre></div>

<p>Function composition in Rust requires three type parameters: <code class="code">T</code> (input type),
<code class="code">U</code> (intermediate type), and <code class="code">V</code> (output type). This allows composing
functions with different input and output types.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e43"></a>Exercise 1.43:</strong> If <em class="math">f</em> is a numerical function
and <em class="math">n</em> is a positive integer, then we can form the <em class="math">n^{\text{th}}</em> repeated
application of <em class="math">f</em>, which is defined to be the function whose value at <em class="math">x</em>
is <em class="math">{f(f(\dots (f(x))\dots ))}</em>.  For example, if <em class="math">f</em> is the
function <em class="math">{x \mapsto x + 1}</em>, then the <em class="math">n^{\text{th}}</em> repeated application of <em class="math">f</em> is
the function <em class="math">{x \mapsto x + n}</em>.  If <em class="math">f</em> is the operation of squaring a
number, then the <em class="math">n^{\text{th}}</em> repeated application of <em class="math">f</em> is the function that
raises its argument to the <em class="math">{2^n\text{-th}}</em> power.  Write a procedure that takes as
inputs a procedure that computes <em class="math">f</em> and a positive integer <em class="math">n</em> and returns
the procedure that computes the <em class="math">n^{\text{th}}</em> repeated application of <em class="math">f</em>.  Your
procedure should be able to be used as follows:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">repeated(square, 2)(5.0)
// =&gt; 625.0
</pre></div>

<p>Hint: You may find it convenient to use <code class="code">compose</code> from <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e42">Exercise 1.42</a>.
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn repeated&lt;F, T&gt;(f: F, n: usize) -&gt; impl Fn(T) -&gt; T
where
    F: Fn(T) -&gt; T + Clone + 'static,
    T: Clone + 'static,
{
    move |x| {
        let mut result = x;
        for _ in 0..n {
            result = f(result);
        }
        result
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>The <code class="code">repeated</code> function applies <code class="code">f</code> exactly <code class="code">n</code> times to the input.
Both <code class="code">F</code> and <code class="code">T</code> require <code class="code">Clone</code> to allow multiple applications.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e44"></a>Exercise 1.44:</strong> The idea of <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-smoothing"></a>
<em class="dfn">smoothing</em> a
function is an important concept in signal processing.  If <em class="math">f</em> is a function
and <em class="math">{dx}</em> is some small number, then the smoothed version of <em class="math">f</em> is the
function whose value at a point <em class="math">x</em> is the average of <em class="math">{f(x - dx)}</em>, 
<em class="math">{f(x)}</em>, and <em class="math">{f(x + dx)}</em>.  Write a procedure
<code class="code">smooth</code> that takes as input a procedure that computes <em class="math">f</em> and returns a
procedure that computes the smoothed <em class="math">f</em>.  It is sometimes valuable to
repeatedly smooth a function (that is, smooth the smoothed function, and so on)
to obtain the <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-n_002dfold-smoothed-function"></a>
<em class="dfn"><i class="i">n</i>-fold smoothed function</em>.  Show how to generate
the <i class="i">n</i>-fold smoothed function of any given function using <code class="code">smooth</code> and
<code class="code">repeated</code> from <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e43">Exercise 1.43</a>.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e45"></a>Exercise 1.45:</strong> We saw in <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3_002e3">Procedures as General Methods</a>
that attempting to compute square roots by naively finding a fixed point of
<em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y}</em> does not converge, and that this can be fixed by average
damping.  The same method works for finding cube roots as fixed points of the
average-damped <em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y^2}</em>.  Unfortunately, the process does not
work for fourth roots&mdash;a single average damp is not enough to make a
fixed-point search for <em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y^3}</em> converge.  On the other hand, if
we average damp twice (i.e., use the average damp of the average damp of 
<em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y^3}</em>) the fixed-point search does converge.  Do some experiments
to determine how many average damps are required to compute <em class="math">n^{\text{th}}</em> roots as a
fixed-point search based upon repeated average damping of <em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y^{\kern0.1em n-1}}</em>.  
Use this to implement a simple procedure for computing
<em class="math">n^{\text{th}}</em> roots using <code class="code">fixed_point</code>, <code class="code">average_damp</code>, and the
<code class="code">repeated</code> procedure of <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e43">Exercise 1.43</a>.  Assume that any arithmetic
operations you need are available as primitives.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e46"></a>Exercise 1.46:</strong> Several of the numerical methods
described in this chapter are instances of an extremely general computational
strategy known as <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-iterative-improvement"></a>
<em class="dfn">iterative improvement</em>.  Iterative improvement says
that, to compute something, we start with an initial guess for the answer, test
if the guess is good enough, and otherwise improve the guess and continue the
process using the improved guess as the new guess.  Write a procedure
<code class="code">iterative_improve</code> that takes two procedures as arguments: a method for
telling whether a guess is good enough and a method for improving a guess.
<code class="code">Iterative-improve</code> should return as its value a procedure that takes a
guess as argument and keeps improving the guess until it is good enough.
Rewrite the <code class="code">sqrt</code> procedure of <a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e7">Example: Square Roots by Newton&rsquo;s Method</a> and the
<code class="code">fixed_point</code> procedure of <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3_002e3">Procedures as General Methods</a> in terms of
<code class="code">iterative_improve</code>.
</p></blockquote>

<hr>
</div>
<div class="subsection-level-extent" id="g_t1_002e3_002e5">
<h4 class="subsection" id="Iterator-Combinators"><span>1.3.5 Iterator Combinators<a class="copiable-link" href="#Iterator-Combinators"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>Throughout this chapter, we&rsquo;ve explored procedures that operate on other
procedures&mdash;higher-order procedures that abstract common patterns of
computation.  We&rsquo;ve seen <code class="code">sum</code>, <code class="code">product</code>, and <code class="code">accumulate</code> as
ways to capture the essence of iterative combination.  Rust takes this idea
further with <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-iterators"></a>
<em class="dfn">iterators</em>&mdash;a zero-cost abstraction for sequential data
processing that combines the elegance of higher-order functions with the
performance of hand-written loops.
</p>
<h4 class="subheading" id="The-Iterator-Trait"><span>The Iterator Trait<a class="copiable-link" href="#The-Iterator-Trait"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>An iterator is any type that implements the <code class="code">Iterator</code> trait, which
requires a single method:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">pub trait Iterator {
    type Item;

    fn next(&amp;mut self) -&gt; Option&lt;Self::Item&gt;;
}
</pre></div>

<p>The <code class="code">next</code> method returns <code class="code">Some(value)</code> for each element in the
sequence, and <code class="code">None</code> when the sequence is exhausted.  This simple
interface enables powerful compositional patterns.
</p>
<p>Consider counting from 1 to 5.  We can create an iterator from a range:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let range = 1..=5;
let mut iter = range.into_iter();

assert_eq!(iter.next(), Some(1));
assert_eq!(iter.next(), Some(2));
assert_eq!(iter.next(), Some(3));
assert_eq!(iter.next(), Some(4));
assert_eq!(iter.next(), Some(5));
assert_eq!(iter.next(), None);
</pre></div>

<p>The <code class="code">into_iter</code> method comes from the <code class="code">IntoIterator</code> trait, which
types implement to convert themselves into iterators.  Collections like
arrays, vectors, and ranges all implement <code class="code">IntoIterator</code>, allowing them
to be used in <code class="code">for</code> loops and with iterator methods.
</p>
<h4 class="subheading" id="Map_002c-Filter_002c-and-Higher_002dOrder-Operations"><span>Map, Filter, and Higher-Order Operations<a class="copiable-link" href="#Map_002c-Filter_002c-and-Higher_002dOrder-Operations"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>Recall the <code class="code">sum</code> procedure from <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3_002e1">Procedures as Arguments</a>, which abstracted the pattern
of accumulating values across a range.  With iterators, we can separate the
concerns of <em class="emph">generating</em> values, <em class="emph">transforming</em> values, and
<em class="emph">combining</em> values:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">// Sum of squares from 1 to 10
let sum_of_squares: i32 = (1..=10)
    .map(|x| x * x)
    .sum();

assert_eq!(sum_of_squares, 385);
</pre></div>

<p>Here, <code class="code">map</code> is an <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-iterator-combinator"></a>
<em class="dfn">iterator combinator</em>&mdash;a method that
transforms one iterator into another.  It takes a closure and produces a new
iterator that applies the closure to each element.  The <code class="code">sum</code> method is a
<a class="index-entry-id" id="index-consumer"></a>
<em class="dfn">consumer</em>&mdash;it consumes the iterator and produces a final value.
</p>
<p>Compare this to our earlier <code class="code">sum_integers</code> from <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3_002e1">Procedures as Arguments</a>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sum&lt;F&gt;(term: F, a: i32, next: fn(i32) -&gt; i32, b: i32) -&gt; i32
where
    F: Fn(i32) -&gt; i32,
{
    if a &gt; b {
        0
    } else {
        term(a) + sum(term, next(a), next, b)
    }
}

fn sum_cubes(a: i32, b: i32) -&gt; i32 {
    sum(|x| x * x * x, a, |x| x + 1, b)
}
</pre></div>

<p>With iterators, this becomes:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn sum_cubes(a: i32, b: i32) -&gt; i32 {
    (a..=b).map(|x| x * x * x).sum()
}
</pre></div>

<p>The iterator version is more concise and equally expressive.  The <code class="code">map</code>
operation corresponds to our <code class="code">term</code> parameter, the range <code class="code">a..=b</code>
handles iteration, and <code class="code">sum</code> performs the accumulation.
</p>
<p>The <code class="code">filter</code> combinator selects elements based on a predicate, enabling
elegant expression of conditional accumulation.  From <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e33">Exercise 1.33</a>, we
implemented <code class="code">filtered_accumulate</code> to sum or multiply only elements
satisfying a condition.  With iterators:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">// Sum of squares of odd numbers from 1 to 10
let sum: i32 = (1..=10)
    .filter(|x| x % 2 == 1)
    .map(|x| x * x)
    .sum();

assert_eq!(sum, 165);  // 1 + 9 + 25 + 49 + 81
</pre></div>

<p>The <code class="code">filter</code> combinator creates an iterator that yields only values for
which the predicate returns <code class="code">true</code>.  We can chain multiple transformations,
building complex pipelines from simple operations.
</p>
<h4 class="subheading" id="Lazy-Evaluation-and-Zero_002dCost-Abstraction"><span>Lazy Evaluation and Zero-Cost Abstraction<a class="copiable-link" href="#Lazy-Evaluation-and-Zero_002dCost-Abstraction"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>A crucial property of iterator combinators is <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-lazy-evaluation"></a>
<em class="dfn">lazy evaluation</em>&mdash;no
computation happens until a consumer demands values.  When we write:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let iter = (1..=1000000)
    .map(|x| x * x)
    .filter(|x| x % 2 == 0);
</pre></div>

<p>this creates an iterator pipeline but performs no computation.  No array is
allocated, no squares are computed, no filtering occurs.  The iterator is a
lightweight state machine describing <em class="emph">how</em> to produce values, not the
values themselves.
</p>
<p>Computation happens only when we consume the iterator:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let first_five: Vec&lt;i32&gt; = iter.take(5).collect();
</pre></div>

<p>The <code class="code">take</code> combinator creates an iterator that yields at most 5 elements,
and <code class="code">collect</code> consumes the iterator, producing a vector.  Only then are
values computed&mdash;and only the values actually needed.  We compute 5 squares
and perform 5 modulo operations, not a million.
</p>
<p>This laziness enables efficient chaining.  Consider:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let sum: i32 = (1..=1000)
    .map(|x| x * 2)
    .filter(|x| x % 3 == 0)
    .map(|x| x * x)
    .sum();
</pre></div>

<p>A naive implementation might create three intermediate collections: one for
the doubled values, one for the filtered values, and one for the squared
values.  Instead, the Rust compiler fuses these operations into a single loop
with no allocations:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">// Equivalent to hand-written:
let mut sum = 0;
for x in 1..=1000 {
    let doubled = x * 2;
    if doubled % 3 == 0 {
        let squared = doubled * doubled;
        sum += squared;
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>This is zero-cost abstraction: the iterator version compiles to the same
efficient machine code as the manual loop, but expresses the computation more
declaratively.
</p>
<h4 class="subheading" id="The-Fold-Combinator"><span>The Fold Combinator<a class="copiable-link" href="#The-Fold-Combinator"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>The <code class="code">sum</code> and <code class="code">product</code> methods are special cases of a more general
pattern: folding.  The <code class="code">fold</code> combinator corresponds directly to our
<code class="code">accumulate</code> from <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e32">Exercise 1.32</a>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn accumulate&lt;T, F, C&gt;(
    combiner: C,
    null_value: T,
    term: F,
    a: i32,
    next: fn(i32) -&gt; i32,
    b: i32,
) -&gt; T
where
    F: Fn(i32) -&gt; T,
    C: Fn(T, T) -&gt; T,
    T: Copy,
{
    if a &gt; b {
        null_value
    } else {
        combiner(
            term(a),
            accumulate(combiner, null_value, term, next(a), next, b),
        )
    }
}
</pre></div>

<p>With <code class="code">fold</code>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let result = (a..=b)
    .map(term)
    .fold(null_value, combiner);
</pre></div>

<p>The <code class="code">fold</code> method takes an initial value and a binary function, applying
the function to the accumulator and each element in turn.  For example,
factorial can be expressed as:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">fn factorial(n: u64) -&gt; u64 {
    (1..=n).fold(1, |acc, x| acc * x)
}
</pre></div>

<p>This is an iterative process in the sense of <a class="ref" href="1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e1">Linear Recursion and Iteration</a>&mdash;the accumulator
holds the complete state, and the computation proceeds linearly through the
range.
</p>
<h4 class="subheading" id="Rich-Combinator-Library"><span>Rich Combinator Library<a class="copiable-link" href="#Rich-Combinator-Library"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>Rust&rsquo;s standard library provides dozens of iterator combinators, each
capturing a common pattern.  Here are some essential ones:
</p>
<dl class="table">
<dt><code class="code">chain</code></dt>
<dd><p>Concatenates two iterators sequentially.
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let combined: Vec&lt;i32&gt; = (1..=3)
    .chain(10..=12)
    .collect();
assert_eq!(combined, vec![1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12]);
</pre></div>

</dd>
<dt><code class="code">zip</code></dt>
<dd><p>Pairs elements from two iterators.
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let pairs: Vec&lt;(i32, char)&gt; = (1..=3)
    .zip(['a', 'b', 'c'])
    .collect();
assert_eq!(pairs, vec![(1, 'a'), (2, 'b'), (3, 'c')]);
</pre></div>

</dd>
<dt><code class="code">enumerate</code></dt>
<dd><p>Adds indices to iterator elements.
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let indexed: Vec&lt;(usize, char)&gt; = ['a', 'b', 'c']
    .iter()
    .enumerate()
    .collect();
assert_eq!(indexed, vec![(0, 'a'), (1, 'b'), (2, 'c')]);
</pre></div>

</dd>
<dt><code class="code">take</code></dt>
<dd><p>Yields at most <em class="math">n</em> elements.
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let first_three: Vec&lt;i32&gt; = (1..)  // Infinite iterator!
    .take(3)
    .collect();
assert_eq!(first_three, vec![1, 2, 3]);
</pre></div>

</dd>
<dt><code class="code">skip</code></dt>
<dd><p>Skips the first <em class="math">n</em> elements.
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let after_skip: Vec&lt;i32&gt; = (1..=10)
    .skip(5)
    .collect();
assert_eq!(after_skip, vec![6, 7, 8, 9, 10]);
</pre></div>
</dd>
</dl>

<p>These combinators compose freely.  We can express complex queries concisely:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">// Find the sum of the squares of the first 5 even Fibonacci numbers
fn fib_iter() -&gt; impl Iterator&lt;Item = u64&gt; {
    let mut a = 0;
    let mut b = 1;
    std::iter::from_fn(move || {
        let current = a;
        a = b;
        b = current + b;
        Some(current)
    })
}

let sum: u64 = fib_iter()
    .filter(|x| x % 2 == 0)
    .take(5)
    .map(|x| x * x)
    .sum();

assert_eq!(sum, 29480);  // 0 + 4 + 64 + 4624 + 24784
</pre></div>

<p>This pipeline: generates an infinite sequence of Fibonacci numbers, filters
for even values, takes the first 5, squares each, and sums the results.  All
without allocating intermediate collections, all compiled to efficient machine
code.
</p>
<h4 class="subheading" id="Collect-and-Type-Inference"><span>Collect and Type Inference<a class="copiable-link" href="#Collect-and-Type-Inference"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>The <code class="code">collect</code> method deserves special attention.  It consumes an iterator
and builds a collection&mdash;but which collection?  The target type is determined
by type inference:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let v: Vec&lt;i32&gt; = (1..=5).collect();
let a: [i32; 5] = (1..=5).collect();  // Array (size must match!)
</pre></div>

<p>When inference is ambiguous, we use the &ldquo;turbofish&rdquo; syntax <code class="code">::&lt;T&gt;</code>:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let v = (1..=5).collect::&lt;Vec&lt;i32&gt;&gt;();
</pre></div>

<p>Many collection types implement <code class="code">FromIterator</code>, the dual of
<code class="code">IntoIterator</code>.  This trait describes how to build a collection from an
iterator, enabling <code class="code">collect</code> to work with vectors, arrays, sets, maps,
and custom collections.
</p>
<h4 class="subheading" id="Comparison-with-Recursive-Approaches"><span>Comparison with Recursive Approaches<a class="copiable-link" href="#Comparison-with-Recursive-Approaches"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>Throughout Chapter 1, we&rsquo;ve emphasized recursive procedures and the processes
they generate.  Iterators offer a complementary perspective: computation as
data transformation pipelines.  Consider the <code class="code">sum_of_squares</code> procedure
from earlier sections:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">// Recursive version
fn sum_of_squares_rec(a: i32, b: i32) -&gt; i32 {
    if a &gt; b {
        0
    } else {
        (a * a) + sum_of_squares_rec(a + 1, b)
    }
}

// Iterative version (tail-recursive)
fn sum_of_squares_iter(a: i32, b: i32) -&gt; i32 {
    fn iter(a: i32, b: i32, acc: i32) -&gt; i32 {
        if a &gt; b {
            acc
        } else {
            iter(a + 1, b, acc + (a * a))
        }
    }
    iter(a, b, 0)
}

// Iterator version
fn sum_of_squares_range(a: i32, b: i32) -&gt; i32 {
    (a..=b).map(|x| x * x).sum()
}
</pre></div>

<p>All three are equivalent in their mathematical meaning and in their compiled
performance (modern Rust compilers optimize all three similarly).  The choice
among them is stylistic and depends on the problem structure.
</p>
<p>Recursion shines when the problem has natural recursive structure (tree
traversal, divide-and-conquer algorithms).  Iteration shines for sequential
processing where the transformation pipeline is clear.  Rust&rsquo;s iterators give
us the declarative elegance of higher-order functions with the performance of
low-level loops.
</p>
<h4 class="subheading" id="Infinite-Iterators"><span>Infinite Iterators<a class="copiable-link" href="#Infinite-Iterators"> &para;</a></span></h4>

<p>Like the infinite streams we&rsquo;ll explore in <a class="ref" href="3_002e5.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e2">Infinite Streams</a>, iterators can
represent unbounded sequences.  The range <code class="code">1..</code> generates all positive
integers (until overflow).  We can create infinite iterators that generate
values lazily:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">// All positive integers
let naturals = 1..;

// All powers of 2
let powers_of_2 = std::iter::successors(Some(1u64), |n| n.checked_mul(2));

// All Fibonacci numbers (until overflow)
let fibs = std::iter::successors(Some((0u64, 1u64)), |(a, b)| {
    Some((*b, a + b))
}).map(|(a, _)| a);
</pre></div>

<p>These infinite iterators are safe because iteration is lazy.  We must combine
them with <code class="code">take</code>, <code class="code">take_while</code>, or similar combinators to extract
finite subsequences:
</p>
<div class="example">
<pre class="example-preformatted">let first_10_fibs: Vec&lt;u64&gt; = fibs.take(10).collect();
</pre></div>

<p>This pattern&mdash;infinite data structures made practical by lazy
evaluation&mdash;anticipates the stream processing we&rsquo;ll study in Chapter 3.
</p>
<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e42a"></a>Exercise 1.42a:</strong> The <code class="code">sum_of_squares_of_odd</code>
procedure from <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e33">Exercise 1.33</a> can be elegantly expressed with iterators.
Write a function that uses <code class="code">filter</code>, <code class="code">map</code>, and <code class="code">sum</code> to
compute the sum of the squares of all odd integers in the range <em class="math">[a, b]</em>.
</p>
<p>Then modify your solution to sum only the squares of odd <em class="emph">prime</em> numbers
in the range, using the <code class="code">is_prime</code> predicate from <a class="ref" href="1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e6">Example: Testing for Primality</a>.  Compare
the iterator version to a recursive implementation&mdash;which is clearer?
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e42b"></a>Exercise 1.42b:</strong> Implement a function
<code class="code">product_of_squares_of_evens(a: i32, b: i32) -&gt; i32</code> using iterator
combinators that computes the product of the squares of all even numbers in
the range <em class="math">[a, b]</em>.
</p>
<p>Now consider efficiency: if we call this function with <code class="code">a = 1</code> and
<code class="code">b = 1000000</code>, does Rust allocate an array of one million elements?
Explain why or why not, referring to lazy evaluation.  Then explain what
happens if we add <code class="code">.collect::&lt;Vec&lt;_&gt;&gt;()</code> before the final <code class="code">product()</code>
call.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p><strong class="strong"><a class="anchor" id="Exercise-1_002e42c"></a>Exercise 1.42c:</strong> The <code class="code">accumulate</code> procedure
from <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e32">Exercise 1.32</a> takes a <code class="code">combiner</code> function, a <code class="code">null_value</code>,
and a <code class="code">term</code> function.  Implement the following using <code class="code">fold</code>:
</p>
<ol class="enumerate" type="a" start="1">
<li> <code class="code">sum_of_nth_powers(a: i32, b: i32, n: u32) -&gt; i32</code>&mdash;sum of <em class="math">i^n</em>
for <em class="math">i</em> in <em class="math">[a, b]</em>.

</li><li> <code class="code">factorial(n: u64) -&gt; u64</code>&mdash;product of integers from 1 to <em class="math">n</em>.

</li><li> The continued fraction from <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e37">Exercise 1.37</a>, computing <em class="math">1/\varphi</em>
where <em class="math">\varphi</em> is the golden ratio.  Use <code class="code">fold</code> to compute the
continued fraction from the bottom up.  (Hint: fold over an iterator of
<code class="code">N</code> and <code class="code">D</code> values.)
</li></ol>

<p>For part (c), you&rsquo;ll need to think about folding from right to left versus
left to right.  Research the <code class="code">rfold</code> method (fold-right) and explain when
it&rsquo;s needed versus <code class="code">fold</code>.
</p></blockquote>

</div>
</div>
<div class="footnotes-segment">
<hr>
<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT44" href="#DOCF44">(44)</a></h5>
<p>This series, usually
written in the equivalent form 
<em class="math">{\pi\over4} = {1 - {1\over3} + {1\over5}} - {{1\over7} + \dots}</em>, 
is due to Leibniz.  We&rsquo;ll see how to use this as the basis for some
fancy numerical tricks in <a class="ref" href="3_002e5.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e3">Exploiting the Stream Paradigm</a>.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT45" href="#DOCF45">(45)</a></h5>
<p>Notice that we have
used block structure (<a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e8">Procedures as Black-Box Abstractions</a>) to embed the definitions of
<code class="code">pi_next</code> and <code class="code">pi_term</code> within <code class="code">pi_sum</code>, since these procedures
are unlikely to be useful for any other purpose. In Rust, we define these as
local functions within the outer function. We will see how to get rid of
them altogether using closures in <a class="ref" href="#g_t1_002e3_002e2">Constructing Procedures Using Closures</a>.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT46" href="#DOCF46">(46)</a></h5>
<p>The
intent of <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e31">Exercise 1.31</a> through <a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e33">Exercise 1.33</a> is to demonstrate the
expressive power that is attained by using an appropriate abstraction to
consolidate many seemingly disparate operations.  However, though accumulation
and filtering are elegant ideas, our hands are somewhat tied in using them at
this point since we do not yet have data structures to provide suitable means
of combination for these abstractions.  We will return to these ideas in
<a class="ref" href="2_002e2.xhtml#g_t2_002e2_002e3">Sequences as Conventional Interfaces</a> when we show how to use <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-sequences"></a>
<em class="dfn">sequences</em> as interfaces
for combining filters and accumulators to build even more powerful
abstractions.  We will see there how these methods really come into their own
as a powerful and elegant approach to designing programs.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT47" href="#DOCF47">(47)</a></h5>
<p>This formula was discovered by the
seventeenth-century English mathematician John Wallis.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT48" href="#DOCF48">(48)</a></h5>
<p>Rust\&rsquo;s closure syntax is inspired by languages like Ruby and
Smalltalk, and ultimately traces back to the λ-calculus, a mathematical
formalism introduced by the mathematical logician Alonzo <a class="ref" href="References.xhtml#Church-_00281941_0029">Church (1941)</a>.
Church developed the λ-calculus to provide a rigorous foundation for
studying the notions of function and function application.  The λ-calculus
has become a basic tool for mathematical investigations of the semantics of
programming languages.  An important feature of Rust closures is that they
can <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-capture"></a>
<em class="dfn">capture</em> variables from their enclosing environment, creating
a closure over those variables.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT49" href="#DOCF49">(49)</a></h5>
<p>Rust\&rsquo;s
<code class="code">let</code> bindings are evaluated sequentially in the order they appear, which
makes the evaluation model straightforward.  Each binding is evaluated using
the environment that includes all previous bindings in the same scope.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT50" href="#DOCF50">(50)</a></h5>
<p>We have used 0.001 as a representative &ldquo;small&rdquo; number to
indicate a tolerance for the acceptable error in a calculation.  The
appropriate tolerance for a real calculation depends upon the problem to be
solved and the limitations of the computer and the algorithm.  This is often a
very subtle consideration, requiring help from a numerical analyst or some
other kind of magician.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT51" href="#DOCF51">(51)</a></h5>
<p>This can be accomplished using <code class="code">error</code>, which takes as
arguments a number of items that are printed as error messages.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT52" href="#DOCF52">(52)</a></h5>
<p>Try this
during a boring lecture: Set your calculator to radians mode and then
repeatedly press the <code class="code">cos</code> button until you obtain the fixed point.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT53" href="#DOCF53">(53)</a></h5>
<p><em class="math">\mapsto</em> (pronounced &ldquo;maps to&rdquo;) is the mathematician&rsquo;s way of
writing functions.  <em class="math">{y \mapsto x / y}</em> means <code class="code">|y| x / y</code>,
that is, the function whose value at <em class="math">y</em> is <em class="math">{x / y}</em>.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT54" href="#DOCF54">(54)</a></h5>
<p>Observe that this is a combination whose
operator is itself a combination.  <a class="ref" href="1_002e1.xhtml#Exercise-1_002e4">Exercise 1.4</a> already demonstrated the
ability to form such combinations, but that was only a toy example.  Here we
begin to see the real need for such combinations&mdash;when applying a procedure
that is obtained as the value returned by a higher-order procedure.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT55" href="#DOCF55">(55)</a></h5>
<p>See
<a class="ref" href="#Exercise-1_002e45">Exercise 1.45</a> for a further generalization.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT56" href="#DOCF56">(56)</a></h5>
<p>Elementary calculus books usually describe Newton&rsquo;s method in
terms of the sequence of approximations <em class="math">x_{n+1} = x_n - {g(x_n)\,/ Dg(x_n)}</em>. 
Having language for talking about processes and using the idea of fixed points 
simplifies the description of the method.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT57" href="#DOCF57">(57)</a></h5>
<p>Newton&rsquo;s
method does not always converge to an answer, but it can
be shown that in favorable cases each iteration doubles the number-of-digits
accuracy of the approximation to the solution.  In such cases, Newton&rsquo;s method
will converge much more rapidly than the half-interval method.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT58" href="#DOCF58">(58)</a></h5>
<p>For
finding square roots, Newton&rsquo;s method converges rapidly to the correct solution
from any starting point.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT59" href="#DOCF59">(59)</a></h5>
<p>The notion of
first-class status of programming-language elements is due to the British
computer scientist Christopher Strachey (1916-1975).</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT60" href="#DOCF60">(60)</a></h5>
<p>We&rsquo;ll see examples of this
after we introduce data structures in <a class="ref" href="Chapter-2.xhtml">Chapter&nbsp;2<!-- /@w --></a>.</p>
<h5 class="footnote-body-heading"><a id="FOOT61" href="#DOCF61">(61)</a></h5>
<p>The major
implementation cost of first-class procedures is that allowing procedures to be
returned as values requires reserving storage for a procedure&rsquo;s free variables
even while the procedure is not executing.  In the Scheme implementation we
will study in <a class="ref" href="4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e1">The Metacircular Evaluator</a>, these variables are stored in the procedure&rsquo;s
environment.</p>
</div>
<hr>
<div class="nav-panel">
<p>
Next: <a href="Chapter-2.xhtml" accesskey="n" rel="next">Building Abstractions with Data</a>, Previous: <a href="1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Procedures and the Processes They Generate</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml" accesskey="u" rel="up">Building Abstractions with Procedures</a> &nbsp; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml" title="Index" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</div>



</body>
</html>
