<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 7.1, https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Acknowledgments (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)</title>

<meta name="description" content="Acknowledgments (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Acknowledgments (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)" />
<meta name="resource-type" content="document" />
<meta name="distribution" content="global" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,initial-scale=1" />

<link href="index.xhtml" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="index.xhtml" rel="up" title="Top" />
<link href="Chapter-1.xhtml" rel="next" title="Chapter 1" />
<link href="Preface-1e.xhtml" rel="prev" title="Preface 1e" />
<style type="text/css">
<!--
a.copiable-link {visibility: hidden; text-decoration: none; line-height: 0em}
span:hover a.copiable-link {visibility: visible}
-->
</style>

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body lang="en">
<div class="unnumbered-level-extent" id="Acknowledgments">
<div class="nav-panel">
<p>
Next: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml" accesskey="n" rel="next">Building Abstractions with Procedures</a>, Previous: <a href="Preface-1e.xhtml" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Preface to the First Edition</a>, Up: <a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="u" rel="up">Top</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml" title="Index" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</div>
<h2 class="unnumbered" id="Acknowledgments-1"><span>Acknowledgments<a class="copiable-link" href="#Acknowledgments-1"> &#182;</a></span></h2>

<p>We would like to thank the many people who have helped us develop this book and
this curriculum.
</p>
<p>Our subject is a clear intellectual descendant of &#8220;6.231,&#8221; a wonderful
subject on programming linguistics and the λ-calculus taught at
<abbr class="abbr">MIT</abbr> in the late 1960s by Jack Wozencraft and Arthur Evans, Jr.
</p>
<p>We owe a great debt to Robert Fano, who reorganized <abbr class="abbr">MIT</abbr>&#8217;s
introductory curriculum in electrical engineering and computer science to
emphasize the principles of engineering design.  He led us in starting out on
this enterprise and wrote the first set of subject notes from which this book
evolved.
</p>
<p>Much of the style and aesthetics of programming that we try to teach were
developed in conjunction with Guy Lewis Steele Jr., who collaborated with
Gerald Jay Sussman in the initial development of the Scheme language.  In
addition, David Turner, Peter Henderson, Dan Friedman, David Wise, and Will
Clinger have taught us many of the techniques of the functional programming
community that appear in this book.
</p>
<p>Joel Moses taught us about structuring large systems.  His experience with the
Macsyma system for symbolic computation provided the insight that one should
avoid complexities of control and concentrate on organizing the data to reflect
the real structure of the world being modeled.
</p>
<p>Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert formed many of our attitudes about programming
and its place in our intellectual lives.  To them we owe the understanding that
computation provides a means of expression for exploring ideas that would
otherwise be too complex to deal with precisely.  They emphasize that a
student&#8217;s ability to write and modify programs provides a powerful medium in
which exploring becomes a natural activity.
</p>
<p>We also strongly agree with Alan Perlis that programming is lots of fun and we
had better be careful to support the joy of programming.  Part of this joy
derives from observing great masters at work.  We are fortunate to have been
apprentice programmers at the feet of Bill Gosper and Richard Greenblatt.
</p>
<p>It is difficult to identify all the people who have contributed to the
development of our curriculum.  We thank all the lecturers, recitation
instructors, and tutors who have worked with us over the past fifteen years and
put in many extra hours on our subject, especially Bill Siebert, Albert Meyer,
Joe Stoy, Randy Davis, Louis Braida, Eric Grimson, Rod Brooks, Lynn Stein, and
Peter Szolovits.  We would like to specially acknowledge the outstanding
teaching contributions of Franklyn Turbak, now at Wellesley; his work in
undergraduate instruction set a standard that we can all aspire to.  We are
grateful to Jerry Saltzer and Jim Miller for helping us grapple with the
mysteries of concurrency, and to Peter Szolovits and David McAllester for their
contributions to the exposition of nondeterministic evaluation in <a class="ref" href="Chapter-4.xhtml">Chapter 4</a>.
</p>
<p>Many people have put in significant effort presenting this material at other
universities.  Some of the people we have worked closely with are Jacob
Katzenelson at the Technion, Hardy Mayer at the University of California at
Irvine, Joe Stoy at Oxford, Elisha Sacks at Purdue, and Jan Komorowski at the
Norwegian University of Science and Technology.  We are exceptionally proud of
our colleagues who have received major teaching awards for their adaptations of
this subject at other universities, including Kenneth Yip at Yale, Brian Harvey
at the University of California at Berkeley, and Dan Huttenlocher at Cornell.
</p>
<p>Al Moy&#233; arranged for us to teach this material to engineers at
Hewlett-Packard and for the production of videotapes of these lectures.  We
would like to thank the talented instructors&#8212;in particular Jim Miller, Bill
Siebert, and Mike Eisenberg&#8212;who have designed continuing education courses
incorporating these tapes and taught them at universities and industry all over
the world.
</p>
<p>Many educators in other countries have put in significant work translating the
first edition.  Michel Briand, Pierre Chamard, and Andr&#233; Pic produced a
French edition; Susanne Daniels-Herold produced a German edition; and Fumio
Motoyoshi produced a Japanese edition.  We do not know who produced the Chinese
edition, but we consider it an honor to have been selected as the subject of an
&#8220;unauthorized&#8221; translation.
</p>
<p>It is hard to enumerate all the people who have made technical contributions to
the development of the Scheme systems we use for instructional purposes.  In
addition to Guy Steele, principal wizards have included Chris Hanson, Joe
Bowbeer, Jim Miller, Guillermo Rozas, and Stephen Adams.  Others who have put
in significant time are Richard Stallman, Alan Bawden, Kent Pitman, Jon Taft,
Neil Mayle, John Lamping, Gwyn Osnos, Tracy Larrabee, George Carrette, Soma
Chaudhuri, Bill Chiarchiaro, Steven Kirsch, Leigh Klotz, Wayne Noss, Todd Cass,
Patrick O&#8217;Donnell, Kevin Theobald, Daniel Weise, Kenneth Sinclair, Anthony
Courtemanche, Henry M. Wu, Andrew Berlin, and Ruth Shyu.
</p>
<p>Beyond the <abbr class="abbr">MIT</abbr> implementation, we would like to thank the many people
who worked on the <abbr class="abbr">IEEE</abbr> Scheme standard, including William Clinger and
Jonathan Rees, who edited the R⁴RS, and Chris Haynes, David Bartley,
Chris Hanson, and Jim Miller, who prepared the <abbr class="abbr">IEEE</abbr> standard.
</p>
<p>Dan Friedman has been a long-time leader of the Scheme community.  The
community&#8217;s broader work goes beyond issues of language design to encompass
significant educational innovations, such as the high-school curriculum based
on EdScheme by Schemer&#8217;s Inc., and the wonderful books by Mike Eisenberg and by
Brian Harvey and Matthew Wright.
</p>
<p>We appreciate the work of those who contributed to making this a real book,
especially Terry Ehling, Larry Cohen, and Paul Bethge at the <abbr class="abbr">MIT</abbr>
Press.  Ella Mazel found the wonderful cover image.  For the second edition we
are particularly grateful to Bernard and Ella Mazel for help with the book
design, and to David Jones, TeX wizard extraordinaire.  We also are indebted
to those readers who made penetrating comments on the new draft: Jacob
Katzenelson, Hardy Mayer, Jim Miller, and especially Brian Harvey, who did unto
this book as Julie did unto his book <cite class="cite">Simply Scheme</cite>.
</p>
<p>Finally, we would like to acknowledge the support of the organizations that
have encouraged this work over the years, including support from
Hewlett-Packard, made possible by Ira Goldstein and Joel Birnbaum, and support
from <abbr class="abbr">DARPA</abbr>, made possible by Bob Kahn.
</p>
</div>
<hr />
<div class="nav-panel">
<p>
Next: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml" accesskey="n" rel="next">Building Abstractions with Procedures</a>, Previous: <a href="Preface-1e.xhtml" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Preface to the First Edition</a>, Up: <a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="u" rel="up">Top</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml" title="Index" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</div>



</body>
</html>
