<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 7.1, https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
<title>Chapter 1 (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)</title>

<meta name="description" content="Chapter 1 (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Chapter 1 (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)" />
<meta name="resource-type" content="document" />
<meta name="distribution" content="global" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,initial-scale=1" />

<link href="index.xhtml" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="index.xhtml" rel="up" title="Top" />
<link href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1" rel="next" title="1.1" />
<link href="Acknowledgments.xhtml" rel="prev" title="Acknowledgments" />
<style type="text/css">
<!--
a.copiable-link {visibility: hidden; text-decoration: none; line-height: 0em}
span:hover a.copiable-link {visibility: visible}
-->
</style>
<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<script src="js/highlight/prettify.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/highlight/lang-lisp.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/highlight/lang-rust.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body lang="en">
<div class="chapter-level-extent" id="Chapter-1">
<div class="nav-panel">
<p>
Next: <a href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">The Elements of Programming</a>, Previous: <a href="Acknowledgments.xhtml" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Acknowledgments</a>, Up: <a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="u" rel="up">Top</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml" title="Index" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</div>
<h2 class="chapter" id="Building-Abstractions-with-Procedures"><span>1 Building Abstractions with Procedures<a class="copiable-link" href="#Building-Abstractions-with-Procedures"> &#182;</a></span></h2>

<blockquote class="quotation">
<p>The acts of the mind, wherein it exerts its power over simple ideas, are
chiefly these three: 1.&#160;Combining<!-- /@w --> several simple ideas into one compound one,
and thus all complex ideas are made.  2.&#160;The&#160;second<!-- /@w --> is bringing two ideas,
whether simple or complex, together, and setting them by one another so as to
take a view of them at once, without uniting them into one, by which it gets
all its ideas of relations.  3.&#160;The&#160;third<!-- /@w --> is separating them from all other
ideas that accompany them in their real existence: this is called abstraction,
and thus all its general ideas are made.
</p>
<p>&#8212;John Locke, <cite class="cite">An Essay Concerning Human Understanding</cite> (1690)
</p></blockquote>


<p>We are about to study the idea of a <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-computational-process"></a>
<em class="dfn">computational process</em>.
Computational processes are abstract beings that inhabit computers.  As they
evolve, processes manipulate other abstract things called <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-data"></a>
<em class="dfn">data</em>.  The
evolution of a process is directed by a pattern of rules called a
<a class="index-entry-id" id="index-program"></a>
<em class="dfn">program</em>.  People create programs to direct processes.  In effect, we
conjure the spirits of the computer with our spells.
</p>
<p>A computational process is indeed much like a sorcerer&#8217;s idea of a spirit.  It
cannot be seen or touched.  It is not composed of matter at all.  However, it
is very real.  It can perform intellectual work.  It can answer questions.  It
can affect the world by disbursing money at a bank or by controlling a robot
arm in a factory.  The programs we use to conjure processes are like a
sorcerer&#8217;s spells.  They are carefully composed from symbolic expressions in
arcane and esoteric <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-programming-languages"></a>
<em class="dfn">programming languages</em> that prescribe the tasks we
want our processes to perform.
</p>
<p>A computational process, in a correctly working computer, executes programs
precisely and accurately.  Thus, like the sorcerer&#8217;s apprentice, novice
programmers must learn to understand and to anticipate the consequences of
their conjuring.  Even small errors (usually called <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-bugs"></a>
<em class="dfn">bugs</em> or
<a class="index-entry-id" id="index-glitches"></a>
<em class="dfn">glitches</em>) in programs can have complex and unanticipated
consequences.
</p>
<p>Fortunately, learning to program is considerably less dangerous than learning
sorcery, because the spirits we deal with are conveniently contained in a
secure way.  Real-world programming, however, requires care, expertise, and
wisdom.  A small bug in a computer-aided design program, for example, can lead
to the catastrophic collapse of an airplane or a dam or the self-destruction of
an industrial robot.
</p>
<p>Master software engineers have the ability to organize programs so that they
can be reasonably sure that the resulting processes will perform the tasks
intended.  They can visualize the behavior of their systems in advance.  They
know how to structure programs so that unanticipated problems do not lead to
catastrophic consequences, and when problems do arise, they can <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-debug"></a>
<em class="dfn">debug</em>
their programs.  Well-designed computational systems, like well-designed
automobiles or nuclear reactors, are designed in a modular manner, so that the
parts can be constructed, replaced, and debugged separately.
</p>
<h4 class="subsubheading" id="Programming-in-Rust"><span>Programming in Rust<a class="copiable-link" href="#Programming-in-Rust"> &#182;</a></span></h4>

<p>We need an appropriate language for describing processes, and we will use for
this purpose the programming language Rust.  Just as our everyday thoughts are
usually expressed in our natural language (such as English, French, or
Japanese), and descriptions of quantitative phenomena are expressed with
mathematical notations, our procedural thoughts will be expressed in Rust.
</p>
<p>Rust is a modern systems programming language focused on safety, speed, and
concurrency. While the original edition of this book used Lisp (specifically
Scheme) to demonstrate these concepts, we will explore them through the lens of
Rust. This offers a modern perspective on abstraction: where Lisp is
dynamically typed and garbage collected, Rust is statically typed and uses a
unique ownership model to manage memory without a garbage collector.
Despite these differences, the core principles of abstraction and modularity
remain universal.
</p>
<p>Rust was born at Mozilla Research, with a vision to create a language that was
both safe and fast. It reached version 1.0 in 2015 and has since gained wide
adoption for its ability to prevent entire classes of bugs (like null pointer
dereferencing and data races) at compile time.
</p>
<p>Why are we using Rust as the framework for our discussion of programming?
Because it forces us to think clearly about the ownership and lifetime of our
data, which are crucial concepts in modern software engineering. While Lisp
blurs the distinction between data and code through its uniform structure,
Rust achieves powerful abstractions through its trait system and zero-cost
abstractions. This allows us to write high-level code that compiles down to
efficient machine instructions.
</p>
<p>Using Rust for these exercises will challenge you to think about types and
memory in a way that dynamic languages do not, providing a rigorous foundation
for understanding how computer systems actually work.
</p>

</div>
<hr />
<div class="nav-panel">
<p>
Next: <a href="1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">The Elements of Programming</a>, Previous: <a href="Acknowledgments.xhtml" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Acknowledgments</a>, Up: <a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="u" rel="up">Top</a> &#160; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml" title="Index" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</div>



</body>
</html>
