<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 7.1, https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8">
<title>UTF (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)</title>

<meta name="description" content="UTF (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)">
<meta name="keywords" content="UTF (Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e)">
<meta name="resource-type" content="document">
<meta name="distribution" content="global">
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any">
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,initial-scale=1">

<link href="index.xhtml" rel="start" title="Top">
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml" rel="index" title="Term Index">
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents">
<link href="index.xhtml" rel="up" title="Top">
<link href="Dedication.xhtml" rel="next" title="Dedication">
<link href="index.xhtml" rel="prev" title="Top">
<style type="text/css">
<!--
a.copiable-link {visibility: hidden; text-decoration: none; line-height: 0em}
span:hover a.copiable-link {visibility: visible}
-->
</style>


</head>

<body lang="en">
<div class="unnumbered-level-extent" id="UTF">
<div class="nav-panel">
<p>
Next: <a href="Dedication.xhtml" accesskey="n" rel="next">Dedication</a>, Previous: <a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Top</a>, Up: <a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="u" rel="up">Top</a> &nbsp; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml" title="Index" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</div>
<h2 class="unnumbered" id="Unofficial-Texinfo-Format"><span>Unofficial Texinfo Format<a class="copiable-link" href="#Unofficial-Texinfo-Format"> &para;</a></span></h2>

<p>This is the second edition <abbr class="abbr">SICP</abbr> book,<br> from Unofficial Texinfo
Format.
</p>
<p>You are probably reading it in an Info hypertext browser, such as the Info
mode of Emacs.  You might alternatively be reading it TeX-formatted on your
screen or printer, though that would be silly.  And, if printed, expensive. 
</p>
<p>The freely-distributed official <abbr class="abbr">HTML</abbr>-and-<abbr class="abbr">GIF</abbr> format was
first converted personally to Unofficial Texinfo Format (<abbr class="abbr">UTF</abbr>)
version 1 by Lytha Ayth during a long Emacs lovefest weekend in April, 2001.
</p>
<p>The <abbr class="abbr">UTF</abbr> is easier to search than the <abbr class="abbr">HTML</abbr> format.  It is
also much more accessible to people running on modest computers, such as
donated &rsquo;386-based PCs.  A 386 can, in theory, run Linux, Emacs, and a Scheme
interpreter simultaneously, but most 386s probably can&rsquo;t also run both Netscape
and the necessary X Window System without prematurely introducing budding young
underfunded hackers to the concept of <a class="index-entry-id" id="index-thrashing"></a>
<em class="dfn">thrashing</em>.  <abbr class="abbr">UTF</abbr> can also fit
uncompressed on a 1.44<abbr class="abbr">MB</abbr> floppy diskette, which may come in handy for
installing <abbr class="abbr">UTF</abbr> on PCs that do not have Internet or <abbr class="abbr">LAN</abbr> access.
</p>
<p>The Texinfo conversion has been a straight transliteration, to the extent
possible.  Like the TeX-to-<abbr class="abbr">HTML</abbr> conversion, this was not without
some introduction of breakage.  In the case of Unofficial Texinfo Format,
figures have suffered an amateurish resurrection of the lost art of
<abbr class="abbr">ASCII</abbr>.  Also, it&rsquo;s quite possible that some errors of ambiguity
were introduced during the conversion of some of the copious superscripts (&lsquo;^&rsquo;)
and subscripts (&lsquo;_&rsquo;).  Divining <em class="emph">which</em> has been left as an exercise to
the reader. But at least we don&rsquo;t put our brave astronauts at risk by encoding
the <em class="emph">greater-than-or-equal</em> symbol as <code class="code">&lt;u&gt;&amp;gt;&lt;/u&gt;</code>.
</p>
<p>If you modify <samp class="file">sicp.texi</samp> to correct errors or improve the
<abbr class="abbr">ASCII</abbr> art, then update the <code class="code">@set utfversion 2.andresraba6.6</code>
line to reflect your delta.  For example, if you started with Lytha&rsquo;s version
<code class="code">1</code>, and your name is Bob, then you could name your successive versions
<code class="code">1.bob1</code>, <code class="code">1.bob2</code>, &hellip; <code class="code">1.bob<i class="i">n</i></code>.  Also update
<code class="code">utfversiondate</code>.  If you want to distribute your version on the Web, then
embedding the string &ldquo;sicp.texi&rdquo; somewhere in the file or Web page will make
it easier for people to find with Web search engines.
</p>
<p>It is believed that the Unofficial Texinfo Format is in keeping with the
spirit of the graciously freely-distributed <abbr class="abbr">HTML</abbr> version.  But you
never know when someone&rsquo;s armada of lawyers might need something to do, and get
their shorts all in a knot over some benign little thing, so think twice before
you use your full name or distribute Info, <abbr class="abbr">DVI</abbr>, PostScript, or
<abbr class="abbr">PDF</abbr> formats that might embed your account or machine name.
<i class="i">Peath, Lytha Ayth</i>
</p>
<p><b class="b">Addendum:</b> See also the <abbr class="abbr">SICP</abbr> video lectures by Abelson and Sussman:
at <a class="url" href="http://groups.csail.mit.edu/mac/classes/6.001/abelson-sussman-lectures/"><abbr class="abbr">MIT CSAIL</abbr></a> or 
<a class="url" href="http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-001-structure-and-interpretation-of-computer-programs-spring-2005/video-lectures/"><abbr class="abbr">MIT OCW</abbr></a>.
</p>
<p><b class="b">Second Addendum:</b> Above is the original introduction to the <abbr class="abbr">UTF</abbr> 
from 2001. Ten years later, <abbr class="abbr">UTF</abbr> has been transformed: mathematical 
symbols and formulas are properly typeset, and figures drawn in 
vector graphics. The original text formulas and <abbr class="abbr">ASCII</abbr> art figures 
are still there in the Texinfo source, but will display only when compiled 
to Info output. At the dawn of e-book readers and tablets, reading a 
<abbr class="abbr">PDF</abbr> on screen is officially not silly anymore. Enjoy!
<i class="i">A.R, May, 2011</i>
</p>
<p><b class="b">Third Addendum:</b> Things go in spirals. We explored the powers of 
Texinfo and LaTeX at typesetting the <abbr class="abbr">PDF</abbr> book.
Now it&rsquo;s time to come back to <abbr class="abbr">HTML</abbr>. This turn it shall be
<abbr class="abbr">HTML5</abbr>. &ldquo;It can be a dangerous place, but it&rsquo;s our last, best hope
for peace.&rdquo; (Sinclair, <cite class="cite">Babylon&nbsp;5<!-- /@w --></cite>.) Does the peace endure after the 
browser wars? Anyway, the aim of the project is to approach the quality of LaTeX
output by using the <abbr class="abbr">HTML5</abbr> toolbox. JavaScript, <abbr class="abbr">CSS3</abbr>, <abbr class="abbr">SVG</abbr>,
MathJax, MathML, and web fonts are employed here. Due to the experimental
nature of this undertaking, there will be glitches and errors in some browsers. 
Technical and artistic help is appreciated. In the meantime, enjoy the book, and 
fire up a <abbr class="abbr">REPL</abbr>!
<i class="i">A.R, January, 2014</i>
</p>
</div>
<hr>
<div class="nav-panel">
<p>
Next: <a href="Dedication.xhtml" accesskey="n" rel="next">Dedication</a>, Previous: <a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Top</a>, Up: <a href="index.xhtml" accesskey="u" rel="up">Top</a> &nbsp; [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml" title="Index" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</div>



</body>
</html>
